Springer
             Graduate Texts in Mathematics             73
                                              Editorial Board
                          S. Axler   F.W. Gehring   K.A. Ribet




Springer
New York
Berlin
Heidelberg
Hong Kong
London
Milan
Paris
Tokyo
Thomas W. Hungerford


ALGEBRA




   Springer
Thomas W. Hungerford
Department of Mathematics
Cleveland State University
Cleveland, OH 441 15
USA                                                                                                        To Mary
Editorial Board

S. Axler                                F.W. Gehring                          K.A. Ribet
Mathematics Department                  Mathematics Department                Mathematics Department
San Francisco State                     East Hall                             University of California,
  University                            University of Michigan                   Berkeley
San Francisco, CA 94132                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109                   Berkeley, CA 94720-3840
USA                                     USA                                   USA
axler@sfsu.edu                          fgehring®                             ribet@math.berkeley.edu
                                        math.Isa.umich.edu




Mathematics Subject Classification (2000): 26-01

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hungerford, Thomas W.
     Algebra
     Bibliography: p.
     1.   Algebra   I.   Title
   QA155.H83             512                  73-15693

ISBN 0-387-90518-9               Printed on acid-free paper.
ISBN 3-540-90518-9

© 1974 Springer- Verlag New York, Inc.
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 175 Fifth Avenue, New York,            NY
10010, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in
connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer
software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are
subject to proprietary rights.


Printed in the United States of America.      (ASC/SBA)

15 14 13


SPIN 11013129

Springer-Verlag is a part of Springer Science* Business Media


springeronline. com
          Preface to the
         Springer Edition

    The reception given to the first edition of Algebra indicates that is has filled a
definite need: to provide a self-contained, one- volume, graduate level algebra text
that is readable by the average graduate student and flexible enough to accomodate
a wide variety of instructors and course contents. Since it has been so well re-
ceived, an extensive revision at this time does not seem warranted. Therefore,
no substantial changes have been made in the text for this revised printing. How-
ever, all known misprints and errors have been corrected and several proofs have
been rewritten.
    I   am grateful to Paul Halmos and F. W. Gehring, and the Springer staff, for
their encouragement and assistance in bringing out this edition. It is gratifying to
know that Algebra will continue to be available to the mathematical community.
Springer- Verlag is to be commended for its willingness to continue to produce
high quality mathematics texts at a time when many other publishers are looking
to less elegant but more lucrative ventures.


Seattle,   Washington                                            thomas w. hungerford
June, 1980




   Note on the twelfth printing (2003): A number of corrections were incorporated in the fifth
printing, thanks to the sharp-eyed diligence of George Bergman and his students at Berkeley
                                                                                          and
Keqin Feng of the Chinese University of Science and Technology. Additional corrections appear
in this printing,   thanks to Victor Boyko,   Bob Cacioppo, Joe L. Mott, Robert Joly, and Joe
Brody.




                                               vii
                                Preface


                       Note:   A complete discussion of possible
                       ways of using    this     text,   including sug-
                       gested course outlines, is given on page xv.




This book is intended to serve as a basic text for an algebra course at the beginning
graduate level. Its writing was begun several years ago when I was unable to find
a one-volume text which I considered suitable for such a course. My criteria for
"suitability," which I hope are met in the present book, are as follows.

    (i)   A conscious effort has been made to produce a text which an average (but
reasonably prepared) graduate student might read by himself without undue diffi-
culty. The stress is on clarity rather than brevity.
   (ii)   For the reader's convenience the book is essentially self-contained. Con-
sequently it includes much undergraduate level material which may be easily omitted
by the better prepared reader.
  (iii)  Since there is no universal agreement on the content of a first year graduate
algebra course we have included more material than could reasonably be covered in
a single year. The major areas covered are treated in sufficient breadth and depth
for the first year graduate level. Unfortunately reasons of space and economics have
forced the omission of certain topics, such as valuation theory. For the most part
these omitted subjects are those which seem to be least likely to be covered in a one
year course.
  (iv)    The text is arranged to provide the instructor with maximum flexibility in
the choice, order and degree of coverage of topics, without sacrificing readability
for the student.
   (v)    There is an unusually large number of exercises.

  There are, in theory, no formal prerequisites other than some elementary facts
about sets, functions, the integers, and the real numbers, and a certain amount of
"mathematical maturity." In actual practice, however, an undergraduate course in
modern algebra is probably a necessity for most students. Indeed the book is
written on this assumption, so that a number of concepts with which the typical
graduate student may be assumed to be acquainted (for example, matrices) are
presented in examples, exercises, and occasional proofs before they are formally
treated in the text.

                                            ix
X                                         PREFACE                                                                                     PREFACE                                       XI




      The guiding philosophical principle throughout the book is that the material            the truth of the old adage: one man's meat is another's poison. Consequently no
should be presented in the maximum useable generality consistent with good pedago-            exercises are starred. The exercises are important in that a student is unlikely to
gy. The principle is relatively easy to apply to various technical questions. It is more      appreciate or to master the material fully if he does not do a reasonable number of
difficult to apply to broader questions of conceptual organization.     On the one hand,      exercises. But the exercises are not an integral part of the text in the sense that non-

for example, the student must be made aware of relatively recent insights into the            trivial   proofs of certain needed results are left entirely to the reader as exercises.
nature of algebra: the heart of the matter is the study of morphisms (maps); many               Nevertheless, most students are quite capable of proving nontrivial propositions
deep and important concepts are best viewed as universal mapping properties. On               provided that they are given appropriate guidance. Consequently, some theorems
the other hand, a high level of abstraction and generality is best appreciated and            in the text are followed by a "sketch of proof" rather than a complete proof. Some-

fully understood only by those who have a firm grounding in the special situations            times such a sketch is no more than a reference to appropriate theorems. On other
which motivated these abstractions. Consequently, concepts which can be character-            occasions it may present the more difficult parts of a proof or a necessary "trick"
ized by a universal mapping property are not defined via this property if there is            in full detail and omit the rest. Frequently all the major steps of a proof will be

available a definition which is more familiar to or comprehensible by the student.            stated, with the reasons or the routine calculational details left to the reader. Some

In such cases the universal mapping property is then given in a theorem.                      of these latter "sketches" would be considered complete proofs by many people. In
      Categories are introduced early and some terminology of category theory is used         such cases the word "sketch" serves to warn the student that the proof in question
frequently thereafter. However, the language of categories is employed chiefly as a           is somewhat more concise than and possibly not as easy to follow as some of the

useful convenience.      A reader who is unfamiliar with categories should have little        "complete" proofs given elsewhere in the text.
difficulty   reading most of the book, even as a casual reference. Nevertheless, an
instructor who so desires may give a substantial categorical flavor to the entire course
                                                                                              Seattle,   Washington                                         THOMAS W. HUNGERFORD
without difficulty by treating Chapter X (Categories) at an early stage. Since it is
                                                                                              September, 1973
essentially independent of the rest of the book it may be read at any time.
      Other features of the mathematical exposition are as follows.
      Infinite sets, infinite cardinal numbers, and transfinite arguments are used routine-
ly.    All of the necessary set theoretic prerequisites, including complete proofs of
the relevant facts of cardinal arithmetic, are given in the Introduction.
      The proof of the Sylow Theorems suggested by R. J. Nunke seems to clarify an
area which is frequently confusing to many students.
      Our treatment of Galois theory is based on that of Irving Kaplansky, who has
successfully extended certain ideas of Emil Artin. The Galois        group and the basic
connection between subgroups and subfields are defined in the context of an ab-
solutely general pair of fields. Among other things this permits easy generalization of
various results to the infinite dimensional case. The Fundamental Theorem is proved
at the beginning, before splitting fields, normality, separability, etc.       have been
introduced. Consequently the very real danger in many presentations, namely that
student will lose sight of the forest for the trees, is minimized and perhaps avoided
entirely.

      In dealing with separable field extensions we distinguish the algebraic and the
transcendental cases. This seems to be far better from a pedogogical standpoint than
the Bourbaki method of presenting both cases simultaneously.
      If one assumes that all rings have identities, all homomorphisms preserve identi-
tiesand all modules are unitary, then a very quick treatment of semisimple rings
and modules is possible. Unfortunately such an approach does not adequately pre-
pare a student to read much of the literature in the theory of noncommutative rings.
Consequently the structure theory of rings (in particular, semisimple left Artinian
rings) is presented in a more general context. This treatment includes the situation
mentioned above, but also deals fully with rings without identity, the Jacobson
radical and related topics. In addition the prime radical and Goldie's Theorem on
semiprime rings are discussed.
  There are a large number of exercises of varying scope and difficulty. My experi-
ence in attempting to "star" the more difficult ones has thoroughly convinced me of
            Acknowledgments




A large number of people have influenced the writing of this book either directly
or indirectly. My first thanks go to Charles Conway, Vincent McBrien, Raymond
Swords, S.J., and Paul Halmos. Without their advice, encouragement, and assistance
at various stages of my educational career I would not have become a mathematician.
I   also wish to thank my thesis advisor Saunders Mac Lane, who was my first guide
in the art of mathematical exposition. I can only hope that this   book approaches
the high standard of excellence exemplified by his own books.
    My colleagues at the University of Washington have offered advice on various
parts of the manuscript. In particular I am grateful to R. J. Nunke, G. S.    Monk,
R. Warfield, and D. Knudson. Thanks are also due to the students who have used
preliminary versions of the manuscript during the past four years. Their comments
have substantially improved the final product.
  It is a pleasure to acknowledge the help of the secretarial staff at the University

of Washington. Two preliminary versions were typed by Donna Thompson, some-
times assisted by Jan Nigh, Pat Watanabe, Pam Brink, and Sandra Evans.          The
final version was typed by Sonja Ogle, Kay Kolodziej Martin, and Vicki Caryl,
with occasional assistance from Lois Bond, Geri Button, and Jan Schille.
   Mary, my wife, deserves an accolade for her patience during the (seemingly inter-
minable) time the book was being written. The final word belongs to our daughter
Anne, age three, and our son Tom, age two, whose somewhat unexpected arrival
after eleven years of marriage substantially prolonged the writing of this book:
a small price to pay for such a progeny.




                                        xiii
       Suggestions
  on the Use of this Book
GENERAL INFORMATION
Within a given section all definitions, lemmas, theorems, propositions and corol-
laries are numbered consecutively (for example, in section 3
                                                             of some chapter the
fourth numbered item is Item 3.4). The exercises in each section are numbered
                                                                               in a

separate system. Cross  references  are given   in accordance   with  the following

scheme.

      (i)    Section 3 of Chapter V is referred to as section 3 throughout Chapter V and
as section V.3 elsewhere.
        Exercise 2 of section 3 of Chapter V is referred to as Exercise 2 throughout
      (ii)

section V.3, as Exercise 3.2 throughout the other sections of Chapter V, and as
Exercise V.3.2 elsewhere.
  (iii)      The fourth numbered item (Definition, Theorem, Corollary, Proposition,
or-   Lemma) of section 3 of Chapter V is referred to as Item 3.4 throughout Chapter V
and as Item V.3.4 elsewhere.

  The symbol         is   used to denote the end of a proof. A complete list of mathematical
symbols precedes the index.

  For those whose Latin is a bit rusty, the phrase mutatis mutandis may be roughly
translated: "by changing the things which (obviously) must be changed (in order
that the argument will carry over and make sense in the present situation)."

  The title "proposition" is applied in this book only to those results which are not
used in the sequel (except possibly in occasional exercises or in the proof of other
"propositions"). Consequently a reader who wishes to follow only the main line of
the development may omit all propositions (and their lemmas and corollaries) with-
out hindering his progress.       Results labeled as lemmas or theorems are almost always
used at some point in the sequel.         When a theorem is only needed in one or two
places after its initial appearance, this fact is usually noted. The few      minor excep-
tions to this labeling scheme should cause little difficulty.




INTERDEPENDENCE OF CHAPTERS
The table on the next page shows chapter interdependence and should be read in
conjunction with the Table of Contents and the notes below (indicated by super-
scripts). In addition the reader should consult the introduction to each chapter for
information on the interdependence of the various sections of the chapter.

                                                XV
XVI                  SUGGESTIONS ON THE USE OF THIS BOOK                                                       SUGGESTED COURSE OUTLINES                                XVII




                                                                             NOTES
                                                                                     1.   Sections 1-7 of the Introduction are essential and are used frequently in the
                                                                             sequel. Except for Section 7 (Zorn's Lemma) this material is almost all elementary.

                                INTRODUCTION                                 The student should also know a definition of cardinal number (Section 8, through
                                    SETS                                     Definition 8.4). The rest of Section 8 is needed only five times. (Theorems II. 1.2 and
                                                                             IV. 2.6; Lemma V.3.5; Theorems V.3.6 and VI. 1.9). Unless one wants to spend a
                                                                             considerable amount of time on cardinal arithmetic, this material may well be
                                                                             postponed until needed or assigned as outside reading for those interested.
                                     V       2,3
                                                                                 2.       A student who has had an undergraduate modern algebra course (or its
                                                                             equivalent) and is familiar with the contents of the Introduction can probably begin
                                                                             reading immediately any one of Chapters I, III, IV, or V.
                                  GROUPS
       V                                                                         3.       A reader who wishes to skip Chapter I is strongly advised to scan Section
                                                                             1.7 to insure that       he is familiar with the language of category theory introduced
  STRUCTURE                                                                  there.
  OF GROUPS                                                CATEGORIES
                                     V       J_
                                             2
                                                                                 4.       With one exception, the only things from Chapter III needed in Chapter IV
                                     III
                                                                             are the basic definitions of Section III.l. However Section III. 3 is a prerequisite for
                                                                             Section IV.6.
                                   RINGS
                                                                                 5.       Some knowledge of solvable groups (Sections II.7, II.8) is needed for the
                                      I                                      study of radical field extensions (Section V.9).

                                                                                 6.       Chapter VI requires only the first six sections of Chapter V.
                                     V     2,3,4

                                                                                 7.       The proof of the Hilbert Nullstellensatz (Section VIII.7) requires some
                                     IV
                                                                             knowledge of transcendence degrees (Section VI. 1) as well as material from Section
                                  MODULES                                    V. 3.

                                                                                 8.       Section VIII. 1 (Chain Conditions) is used extensively in Chapter IX, but
                                                                             Chapter IX is independent of the rest of Chapter VIII.

                                                                                 9.  The basic connection between matrices and endomorphisms of free modules
                                                                             (Section VII. 1, through Theorem VII. 1.4) is used in studying the structure of rings
                                                                             (Chapter IX).
        V      2,5        V                                         8,9,10

                                                                                10.       Section V.3 is a prerequisite for Section IX. 6.
                          VII                      VIII        IX

      GALOIS             LINEAR            COMMUTATIVE     STRUCTURE            11.       Sections   1.7,   IV.4,   and IV.5   are prerequisites for Chapter   X; otherwise
      THEORY            ALGEBRA                    RINGS    OF RINGS
                                              & MODULES                      Chapter X       is essentially independent of the rest of the book.




                                                                             SUGGESTED COURSE OUTLINES
        VI
                                                                             The information given above, together with the introductions to the various chapters,
                                                                             is sufficient for designing a wide variety of courses of varying content and length.
  STRUCTURE
   OF FIELDS                                                                 Here are some of the possible one quarter courses (30 class meetings) on specific
                                                                             topics.
                                                                                These descriptions are somewhat elastic depending on how much is assumed, the
                                                                             level of the class, etc. Under the heading Review we list background material (often
                                                                             of an elementary nature) which is frequently used in the course. This material may
                                                                                                                                                                                              7




xviii                     SUGGESTIONS ON THE USE OF THIS BOOK                                                                  SUGGESTED COURSE OUTLINES                                    XIX



be assumed or covered briefly or assigned as outside reading or treated in detail if            COMMUTATIVE ALGEBRA
necessary, depending on the background of the class. It is assumed without ex-
plicit mention that the student is familiar with the appropriate parts of the Intro-            Review       Sections III. 1 III.2 (through Theorem III. 2. 1 3). Basic Course
                                                                                                         :                 ,                                                     :   the rest of
duction (see note 1, p. xvii). Almost all of these courses can be shortened by omit-            Section III.2; Sections III.3 and III.4; Section IV.l   ;   Section IV.2 (through Corollary
ting all Propostions and their associated Lemmas and Corollaries (see page xv).                 IV.2.2); Section IV.3 (through Proposition IV. 3. 5); Sections 1-6 of Chapter VIII,
                                                                                                with the possible omission of Propositions. Additional topics:              Section VIII.
                                                                                                (which also requires background from Sections V.3 and VI. 1).

GROUP THEORY
Review:     Introduction, omitting most of Section 8 (see note 1, p. xvii). Basic
Course:    Chapters I and II, with the possible omission of Sections 1.9, II. 3 and the
last half of II. 7. It is also possible to omit Sections II. 1 and II. 2 or at least postpone
them until after the Sylow Theorems (Section II. 5).



MODULES AND THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS
Review:       Sections III. 1 and III. 2 (through Theorem III. 2. 13). Basic Course:      the
rest of Section III. 2; Sections 1-5 of Chapter IV 1 ; Section VII. 1 (through Theorem
VII. 1 .4); Section VIII. 1   ;   Sections 1-4 of Chapter IX. Additional Topics:    Sections
III. 4,   IV. 6, IV. 7, IX. 5; Section IV. 5 if not covered earlier; Section IX. 6; material
from Chapter VIII.




FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY

Review: polynomials, modules, vector spaces (Sections III. 5, III. 6, IV. 1, IV. 2).
Solvable groups (Sections II. 7, II. 8) are used in Section V.9. Basic Course 2 Sec- :


tions 1-3 of Chapter V, omitting the appendices; Definition V.4.1 and Theorems
V.4.2 and V.4.12; Section V.5 (through Theorem 5.3); Theorem V.6.2; Section
V.7, omitting Proposition V. 7.        7—
                                   Corollary V.7.9; Theorem V.8.1; Section V.9
(through Corollary V.9. 5); Section VI. 1. Additional Topics: the rest of Sections
V.5 and V.6 (at least through Definition V.6.10); the appendices to Sections V.l-
V.3; the rest of Sections V.4, V.9, and V.7; Section V.8; Section VI.2.




LINEAR ALGEBRA
Review: Sections 3-6 of Chapter III and Section IV. 1; selected parts of Section
IV. 2 (finite dimensional vector spaces). Basic Course: structure of torsion mod-
ules over a PID (Section IV.6, omitting material on free modules); Sections 1-5 of
Chapter VII, omitting appendices and possibly the Propositions.

  x
    \i the stress is primarily on rings, one may omit most of Chapter IV. Specifically, one
need only cover Section IV. 1; Section IV. 2 (through Theorem IV. 2. 4); Definition IV. 2. 8;
and Section IV. 3 (through Definition IV. 3. 6).
  2
    The outline given here is designed so that the solvability of polynomial equations can be
discussed quickly after the Fundamental Theorem and splitting fields are presented; it re-
quires using Theorem V.7. 2 as a definition, in place of Definition V.7.1. The discussion may
be further shortened if one considers only finite dimensional extensions and omits algebraic
closures, as indicated in the note preceding Theorem V.3.3.
            Table of Contents




Preface                                                           x
                                                              |
                                                             xiii
Acknowledgments
Suggestions on the Use of This Book                          *v


Introduction:        Prerequisites and Preliminaries              1



                                                                  1
  1 .   Logic
 2.     Sets and Classes                                          1


  3.    Functions                                                 3

 4.     Relations and Partitions                                  6

 5.     Products                                                  7

 6.     The Integers                                              9

 7.     The Axiom of Choice, Order and Zorn's Lemma           12
 8.     Cardinal Numbers                                      15



Chapter I:      Groups                                        23

  1.    Semigroups, Monoids and Groups                        24
 2.     Homomorphisms and Subgroups                           30
  3.    Cyclic Groups                                         35
 4.     Cosets and Counting                                   37
  5.    Normality, Quotient Groups, and Homomorphisms         41
 6.     Symmetric, Alternating, and Dihedral Groups           46
 7.     Categories: Products, Coproducts, and Free Objects    52
  8.    Direct Products and Direct Sums                       59
  9.    Free Groups, Free Products, Generators & Relations    64


Chapter II:        The Structure of Groups                   70

  1.    Free Abelian Groups                                   70
  2.    Finitely Generated Abelian Groups                     76

                                          xxi
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS                          xxiii




  3.   The Krull-Schmidt Theorem                            83   Chapter VII:        Linear Algebra                                         327
  4.   The Action of a Group on a Set                       88
                                                                   1.    Matrices and Maps                                                  328
  5.   The Sylow Theorems                                   92
                                                                   2.    Rank and Equivalence                                               335
  6.   Classification of Finite Groups                      96
                                                                           Appendix: Abelian Groups Defined by
  7.   Nilpotent and Solvable Groups                       100
                                                                                      Generators and Relations                              343
  8.   Normal and Subnormal Series                         107
                                                                   3.    Determinants                                                       348
                                                                   4.    Decomposition of a Single Linear Transformation and Similarity.    355
                                                                   5.    The Characteristic Polynomial, Eigenvectors and Eigenvalues ....   366
Chapter III:      Rings                                    114

  1.   Rings and Homomorphisms                             115
  2.   Ideals                                              122
                                                                 Chapter VIII:        Commutative Rings and Modules                         371

  3.   Factorization in Commutative Rings                  135
 4.    Rings of Quotients and Localization                 142     1.    Chain Conditions                                                   372
  5.   Rings of Polynomials and Formal Power Series        149     2.    Prime and Primary Ideals                                           377
  6.   Factorization in Polynomial Rings                   157     3.    Primary Decomposition                                              383
                                                                   4.    Noetherian Rings and Modules                                       387
                                                                   5.    Ring Extensions                                                    394
Chapter IV:       Modules                                  168     6.    Dedekind Domains                                                   400
                                                                   7.    The Hilbert Nullstellensatz                                        409
  1.   Modules, Homomorphisms and Exact Sequences          169
  2.   Free Modules and Vector Spaces                      180
  3.   Projective and Injective Modules                    190   Chapter IX:        The Structure of Rings                                  414
 4.    Horn and Duality                                    199
  5.   Tensor Products                                     207     1.    Simple and Primitive Rings                                         415
 6.    Modules over a Principal Ideal Domain               218     2.    The Jacobson Radical                                               424
  7.   Algebras                                            226     3.    Semisimple Rings                                                   434
                                                                  4.     The Prime Radical; Prime and Semiprime Rings                       444
                                                                   5.    Algebras                                                           450
Chapter V:        Fields and Galois Theory                 230     6.    Division Algebras                                                  456

  1.   Field Extensions                                    231
         Appendix: Ruler and Compass Constructions         238   Chapter X:         Categories                                              464
  2.   The Fundamental Theorem                             243
                                                                   1.    Functors and Natural Transformations                               465
         Appendix: Symmetric Rational Functions            252
                                                                   2.    Adjoint Functors                                                   476
  3.   Splitting Fields, Algebraic Closure and Normality   257
                                                                   3.    Morphisms                                                          480
         Appendix: The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra      265
 4.    The Galois Group of a Polynomial                    269
  5.   Finite Fields                                       278   List of Symbols                                                            485
  6.   Separability                                        282   Bibliography                                                               489
  7.   Cyclic Extensions                                   289   Index                                                                      493
  8.   Cyclotomic Extensions                               297
  9.   Radical Extensions                                  302
         Appendix: The General Equation of Degree n        307



Chapter VI:       The Structure of Fields                  311

  1.   Transcendence Bases                                 311
  2.   Linear Disjointness and Separability                318
r




                                    INTRODUCTION

                 PREREQUISITES AND
                   PRELIMINARIES



    In Sections 1-6 we summarize for the reader's convenience some basic material with
    which he is assumed to be thoroughly familiar (with the possible exception of the dis-
    tinction between sets and proper classes (Section 2), the characterization of the
    Cartesian product by a universal mapping property (Theorem 5.2) and the Recursion
    Theorem 6.2). The definition of cardinal number (first part of Section 8) will be used
    frequently. The Axiom of Choice and its equivalents (Section 7) and cardinal arith-
    metic (last part of Section 8) may be postponed until this information is actually
    used. Finally the reader is presumed to have some familiarity with the fields Q, R,
    and C of rational, real, and complex numbers respectively.



    1.   LOGIC
        We adopt the usual logical conventions, and consider only statements that have a
    truth value of either true or false (not both). If P and  Q are statements, then the
    statement "P and Q" is true if both P and Q are true and false otherwise. The state-
    ment "P or £)" is true in all cases except when both P and Q are false. An implication
    is a statement of the form "P implies Q" or "if P, then          (written symbolically as
    P =» Q). An implication is false if P is true and Q is false; it is true in all other cases.
    In particular, an implication with a false premise is always a true implication. An
    equivalence or biconditional is a statement of the form "P implies Q and Q im-
    plies P." This is generally abbreviated to "P if and only if Q" (symbolically P          Q).
    The biconditional "P          Q" is true exactly when P and Q are both true or both
    false; otherwise it is false. The negation of the statement P is the statement "it is not
    the case that P." It is true if and only if P is false.




    2.   SETS AND CLASSES
         Our approach to the theory of sets will be quite informal. Nevertheless in order
    to define adequately both cardinal numbers (Section 8) and categories (Section 1.7) it

                                                 1
                                                                                                                          .




2                          PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                                   3.     FUNCTIONS                                                             3



will be necessary to introduce at least the rudiments of a formal axiomatization of                                           By the axioms of extensionality and the properties of equality:
set theory. In fact the entire discussion may, if desired, be made rigorously precise;
see Eisenberg [8] or Suppes [10]. An axiomatic approach to set theory is also useful in
                                                                                                                                                                         A = B           <=*        A CZ B and B CZ A.
order to avoid certain paradoxes that are apt to cause difficulty in a purely intuitive                                       A subclass A of a class B that is itself a set is called a subset of B. There are axioms to
treatment of the subject. A paradox occurs in an axiom system when both a state-                                              insure that a subclass of a set is a subset.
ment and its negation are deducible from the axioms. This in turn implies (by an                                                  The empty set or null set (denoted 0) is the set with no elements (that is, given
exercise in elementary logic) that every statement in the system is true, which                                          is   any x, x $ 0). Since the statement "x e 0" is always false, the implication (1) is al-
hardly a very desirable state of affairs.                                                                                     ways true when A = 0. Therefore           CZ B for every class B. A is said to be a proper
   In the Godel-Bernays form of axiomatic set theory, which we shall follow, the                                              subclass of B if A CZ B but A ^        and A ^ B.
primitive (undefined) notions are class, membership, and equality. Intuitively we con-                                            The power axiom asserts that for every set A the class P(A) of all subsets of A is
sider a class to be a collection A of objects (elements) such that given any object x it                                      itself a set. P(A) is called the power set of A; it is also denoted 2 A                                             .


is   possible to determine whether or not x is a member (or element) of A.                                     We write           A family of sets indexed by (the nonempty class) / is a collection of sets A it one
x e A for "x is an element of A" and x ^ A for "x is not an element of A." The axioms                                         for each / e / (denoted Ai i e /}). Given such a family, its union and intersection are
                                                                                                                                                                    {        \




are formulated in terms of these primitive notions and the first-order predicate                                              defined to be respectively the classes
calculus (that is, the language of sentences built up by using the connectives and,
or, not, implies and the quantifiers there exists and for all). For instance, equal-                                                                               \jAi = {x             |
                                                                                                                                                                                             x e Ai       for some            is/); and
                                                                                                                                                                   iii
ity is assumed to have the following properties for all classes A,B, C              A = A;                     :



A = B=>B = A; A = B and B = C=* A = C; A = B and xeA=>xeB. The                                                                                                     f~)Ai         = x x e Ai
                                                                                                                                                                                   {     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                          for every           is/).
                                                                                                                                                                   ill
axiom of extensionality asserts that two classes with the same elements are equal
(formally, [x e A <=> x e B] => A = B).                                                                                       If / is a set,             then suitable axioms insure that \JA { and C]Ai are actually sets. If
    A class A is defined to be a set if and only if there exists a class B such that A e B.                                                                                                                      ill                    iii

                                                                                                                              I =        1,2, . .            n\ one frequently writes Ai                      U A2 U                  U A n in place of \JA and
Thus a set is a particular kind of class. A class that is not a set is called a proper class.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                     {               .
                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                      {

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          til
Intuitively the distinction between sets and proper classes is not too clear. Roughly                                         similarly for intersections. If A           fl B = 0, A and B are said to be disjoint.
speaking a set is a "small" class and a proper class is exceptionally "large." The                                                  If A and        B are classes, the relative complement of A in B is the following subclass
axiom of class formation asserts that for any statement P(y) in the first-order predi-                                        of B:
cate calculus involving a variable y, there exists a class A such that x e A if and only
if x is a set and the statement P(x) is true. We denote this class A by {x P(x)}, and                    \
                                                                                                                                                                         B — A = {x\ x eB and x\A).
refer to "the class of all x such that P(x)" Sometimes a class is described simply by
listing its elements in brackets, for example, {a,b,c}.
                                                                                                                              If all the classes under discussion are subsets of some fixed set                                               U (called the universe
                                                                                                                              of discussion), then U — A is denoted A' and called simply the complement of A.
                                                                                                                              The reader should verify the following statements.
     EXAMPLE.     1
                                   M = [X X a and X^X\. The statement
                       Consider the class                       \
                                                                     is         set
X^X'xs not unreasonable since many                 example, the
                                            sets satisfy it (for  of   books                   set           all        is
                                                                                                                                                                         A             ((Jft) = \J(A            fl   Bd           and                               (2)

not a book). M     a proper
                  is            For M were a
                                class.           if then       M M or M Mset,         either     s                 $
                                                                                                                                                                                       ill              ill


But by the definition of M, Me M implies M M and M$M implies M M. Thus
                                                            ^                                        e                  in                                               a u (na) = n(A u ft).
                                          leads to an untenable paradox: Me M
                                                                                                                                                                                        ui
       case the assumption that M
                                                                                                                                                                                                        iii
either                               a      is        set
and M M. if                                                                                                                                    (IM)' = f]Ai' and (HA)' = LM' (DeMorgan's Laws).                                                                     (3)
                                                                                                                                                    itl            iii                            ill          ill
     We shall now review a number of familiar topics (unions, intersections, functions,
relations, Cartesian products, etc.). The presentation will be informal with the men-                                                                           A U B = B                ^ ACZB                 <=>       A H B = A.                                (4)
tion of axioms omitted for the most part. However, it is also to be understood that
there are sufficient axioms to guarantee that when one of these constructions is per-
formed on sets, the result is also a set (for example, the union of sets is a set; a sub-
class of a set is a set). The usual way of proving that a given class is a set is to show                                     3.    FUNCTIONS
that it may be obtained from a set by a sequence of these admissible constructions.                                              Given classes A and B, a function (or map or mapping) / from A to B (written
     A class A is a subclass of a class B (written A d E) provided:                                                           f:A—>B) assigns to each as A exactly one element b £ B; b is called the value of the
                                                                                                                              function at a or the image of a and is usually written f(a). A is the domain of the
                              for all xeA,            xeA           =>     xeB.                                        (1)
                                                                                                                              function (sometimes written Dom f) and B is the range or codomain. Sometimes it is
                                                                                                                              convenient to denote the effect of the function / on an element of A by a |— f(a). Two
     ^his was first propounded (in somewhat different form) by Bertrand Russell in 1902 as                                    functions are equal if they have the same domain and range and have the same
a paradox that indicated the necessity of a formal axiomatization of set theory.                                              value for each element of their common domain.
4                                   PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                          3.        FUNCTIONS                                                 5



      If /: A   — B is a function and S C A, the function from S to B given by
                 >                                                                                                         alternatively, /is injective if and only if

                                                    a\-*f(a),               for     aeS                                                                 for all a,a' e A,         f(a) = f(a')             =>   a = a'.

is   called the restriction of /to S and is denoted f\ S                        S — 2?. If ^ is any class, the
                                                                                            :       >                      A function /is surjective (or onto) provided f(A) = B; in other words,
identity function on               (denoted         U   :   A — A) is the function given by a \-> a. If S CI A,
                                                                    >
                                                                                                                                                         for each beB, b = f(a)                     for some      as A.
the function 1 A     \
                         S S —> >4 is called the inclusion map of S into A.
                              :



      Let f:A-+B and g                  :   2? — C be functions. The composite of / and g is the function
                                               >                                                                           A function / is said to be bijective (or a bijection or a one-to-one correspondence) if                             it

A —» C given by                                                                                                            is both injectiveand surjective. It follows immediately from these definitions that for
                                                                                                                           any class A, the identity map \ A A — > A is bijective. The reader should verify that
                                                                                                                                                                         :

                                                    ah* *(/(*))>                  fle ^-
                                                                                                                           for maps f:A-^B and g :B — > C,
The composite function is denoted go/or simply gf.lih                                        C — D is a third function,
                                                                                                :       >


it is easy to verify that h(gf)                = (//g) f.Iff: A                    B then / © 1 A = /= \ B o f:A-+B.                                       f and g injective                 =>     g/is injective;                           (9)
                                                                                     9


      A diagram of functions:                                                                                                                            / and g surjective                  =»     g/is surjective;                       (10)

                                                                                                                                                               g/injective              =»    /is injective;                              (11)
                                                            <           '     .B
                                                            h\ /g                                                                                            g/ surjective             =>     g is surjective.                            (12)
                                                                        C
     said to be commutative if gf = h. Similarly, the diagram:
                                                                                                                          Theorem 3.1; Let f: A —» B be a function, with A nonempty.
is




                                                            A                                                                    (i)   f « injective if and only if there is a map g B — > A .M/c/r that gf = 1 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                       :                              .




                                                                                                                                (ii)   // A is a set, then f is surjective ifand only if there is a map h B — > A such that :


                                                                                                                          fh =
                                                            c
                                                                —ir D                                                              l   B   .




                kh = g/. Frequently we shall deal with more complicated diagrams
is commutative if
                                                                                                                                PROOF. Since every identity map is bijective, (11) and (12) prove the implica-
                                                                                                                          tions («=) in (i) and (ii). Conversely if /is injective, then for each bef(A) there is a
composed of a number of triangles and squares as above. Such a diagram is said to
                                                                                                                          unique a e A with f(a) = Z>. Choose a fixed                         O e   A and verify that the map g :B-±A
be commutative if every triangle and square in it is commutative.
                                                                                                                          defined by
   Let /: A —» B be a function. If S                            C
                                       A, the image of S under f (denoted f(S)) is
the class                                                                                                                                                        la      if       bzf(A)            and     f(a) = b
                                                                                                                                                        g(b)=
                                        {beB\b = f(a)                   for some           asS}.                                                                 \ao     if       Z>
                                                                                                                                                                                       f f(A)


The class f(A) is called the image of f and is sometimes denoted Im f If T CI B, the
                                                                                                                          is such that g/ = 1 A For the converse of (ii) suppose / is surjective. Then f~\b)
                                                                                                                                                    .                                                        A                            C
                                                                                                                          is   a nonempty set for every beB. For each Z> e B choose a b e f~\b) (Note: this re-
inverse image of T under / (denoted f~\T)) is the class
                                                                                                                          quires the Axiom of Choice; see Section 7). Verify that the map                               h:B-+A defined by
                                                        {aeA\f(a)eT}.                                                     h(b) = ab is such that fh          = \B   .




If   T consists of a single element, T = {b}, we write /_1 (&) in place of f~ (T). The                       l


                                                                                                                               The map g as in Theorem 3.1 is called a left inverse of / and h is called a right in-
following facts can be easily verified:
                                                                                                                          verse of/. If a map  f:A-^B has both a left inverse g and a right inverse h, then
                                               for SC^I, /-i(/(S)) =)S;                                            (5)
                                                                                                                                                         * = gU =                       = te/)/* =\ A h = h
                                               for T CZ B, f(f~KT))                      C 7\                      (6)
                                                                                                                          and the map g = h is called a two-sided inverse of /. This argument also shows that
For any family           7*       / e   /)   of subsets of 2?,                                                            the two-sided inverse of a map (if it has one) is unique. By Theorem 3.1 if A is a set

                                                                            Um
                     {        |




                                                                                                                          and /: A — > B a function, then
                                                   /- (U7 0=
                                                    1
                                                                ,
                                                                                                                   (7)
                                                                                                                                                  /is bijective         <=>       /has a two-sided inverse. 2                             (13)
                                                   /-'(n^                   nm.                                    (8)
                                                                                                                          The unique two-sided inverse of a bijection /is denoted /_1                             ;   clearly /is a two-sided
                                                                                                                          inverse of /_1 so that /_1 is also a bijection.
      A function f:A—>B is said to be injective (or one-to-one) provided
                    for all    e ^,  fl^fl' => /(a) ^ /(fl');                                                                  ^13) is actually true even when A is a proper class; see Eisenberg [8; p. 146].
                                                                                      {               }




6                        PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                                                5.      PRODUCTS                                                                        7



                                                                                                                          Also observe that
4.   RELATIONS AND PARTITIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   a = h             <=>    >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a    ~ b\                                                    (20)
    The axiom of pair formation states that for any two sets [elements] a,b there is a
set P = {a,b\ such that x e P if and only if x = a or x = b\ if a = b then P is the                                       for if a = 5, then
                                                                                                                                           aea=$aeh=$a~b. Conversely, if a b and c ea, then c                                                         ~                                      ~a
singleton {a}. The ordered pair (a,b) is defined to be the set    a]   a,b]  its first com-
                                                                                  {           ,   {       ;
                                                                                                                          and a~b=>c~b=>ceh. Thus 5 CZ 5; a symmetric argument shows that h                                                                                                  da
ponent is a and its second component is b. It is easy to verify that (a,b) = (a',b') if and                               and therefore a = h. Next we prove:
only if a = a! and b = b' The Cartesian product of classes A and B is the class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a fl J =                         a = h.
                                  .

                                                                                                                                                                        for 0,Z> e A,              either                                        or                                          (21)
                                  AXB= {(a,b)\aeA,beB}.                                                                   If 5 fl h t± 0, then there is an element c e a D 5. Hence c   a and c    b. Using                                            ~                         ~
Note that   ^X0      =         = 0X5.                                                                                     symmetry, transitivity and (20) we have: a        c and c    b    a   b=> a = h.                           ~                 ~                    ~
                                                                                                                              Let ;4 be a nonempty class and {Ai \iel) a family of subsets of A such that:
     A subclass RofA X Bis called a relation on A X B. For example, if /: A — B is
a function, the graph of /is the relation R =                           |
                                                                            a e A) Since /is a function,
                                                                                          .                                                                                         Aij± 0,                   for each              / e   /;

R has the special property:                                                                                                                                                         U A = A;
                                                                                                                                                                                    ui
                                                                                                                                                                                               {



                     every element of A is the first component of                                                                                                                   Ai f) Aj=                         for all             i^je I;
                     one and only one ordered pair in Ft.
                                                                                                                          then       {   A-       1       / e /}   is   said to be a partition of A.
Conversely any relation R on A X B that satisfies (14), determines a unique function
f:A-+B whose graph is R (simply define f(a) = b, where (a,b) is the unique                                                Theorem 4.1. If A is a nonempty set, then the assignment R |— A/R defines a bisec-                                              >
ordered pair in R with first component a). For this reason it is customary in a formal
                                                                                                                          tion from the set E(A) of all equivalence relations on                                                               A onto the set Q(A) of all parti-
axiomatic presentation of set theory to identify a function with its graph, that is, to
                                                                                                                          tions of A.
define a function to be a relation satisfying (14). This is necessary, for example, in
order to prove from the axioms that the image of a set under a function is in fact
                                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF. If P is an equivalence relation on A then the set A/R                                                             9

a set.
                                                                                                                          of equivalence classes is a partition of A by (18), (19), and (21) so that P |—> A/R de-
    Another advantage of this approach is that it permits us to define functions with                                                                                               —* Q(A). Define a function g Q(A) — £(/*) as follows. If
                                                                                                                          fines a function /: £(/*)                                                                                              :

empty domain. For since         XB=       is the unique subset of     X B and vacuously                                   S =                         / e   /} is a partition of /I, let g(S) be the equivalence relation on    A given by:
satisfies (14), there is a unique function     — B. It is also clear from (14) that there                                        {
                                                                                                                                              |




can be a function with empty range only if the domain is also empty. Whenever con-                                                                           ~b                     a e Ai         and          Z>   £ ^»           for some (unique) / £ /.                             (22)
venient we shall think of a function as a relation satisfying (14).
                                                                                                                          Verify that g(S) is in fact an equivalence relation such that a = Ai for a e Ai. Com-
     A relation R on A X A is an equivalence relation on A provided R is:
                                                                                                                          plete the                   proof by verifying that fg = 1q (A                                        )   and gf = 1^). Then / is bijective
                             reflexive: (a,a)      eR       for all    as A;                                      (15)    by (13).

                             symmetric: (a,b) e R           =>    (b,a) e P;                                      (16)

                 transitive: (a,b) e         R    and    (b,c)   eR    =>         (q,c) e R.                      (17)    5.   PRODUCTS
IfR an equivalence relation on A and (a,b) e P, we say that a is equivalent to b
      is                                                                                                                       Note. In this section we deal only with sets. No proper classes are involved.
under P and write a      ~
                    b or aPZ>; in this notation (15)— (17) become:

                                                  a~a;                                                            (15')
                                                                                                                               Consider the Cartesian product of two sets A                                                           Y   X A An element of A X A is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.                              x       2

                                                                                                                          pair (a u a 2) with a { e A i9 i = 1,2. Thus the pair (a u a 2 ) determines a function /: {1,2}
                                         a   ~£     =>     b~a;                                                   (16')   — Ai U A by: /(l) = a u f(2) = a
                                                                                                                                                      2                                                 2.    Conversely, every function /:                           {   1,2}   —A UA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x          2

                                                                                                                          with the property that f(l)                                              A and f{2) e A                     2 determines an element {a u a 2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =
                          ^ b and b ~ c => a ~
                              a                                          (17')
                                                                             c.
                                                                                                                          (/0),/(2)) of Ai X
                                                                                                                                                                                              e     x



                                                                                                                                                   Therefore it is not difficult to see that there is a one-to-one
     Let P (~) be an equivalence relation on A If a the equivalence class of a
                                                                       e ^4,                                              correspondence between the set of all functions of this kind and the set A x X A 2                                                                                    .




(denoted a) is the class of all those elements of A that are equivalent to a\ that is,                                    This fact leads us to generalize the notion of Cartesian product as follows.
a = {be A b \
                ~ a\. The class of all equivalence classes in A is denoted A/R and
called the quotient class of A by P. Since              P is reflexive, a e a for every a e A hence           ;

                                                                                                                          Definition 5.1. Let                              {
                                                                                                                                                                               Ai   |
                                                                                                                                                                                        i   £ IJ   be a family of sets indexed by a (nonempty) set I. The
                    5^0,              for every    a e A;     and      if   A is a set                            (18)    (Cartesian) product of the sets Ai is the set of all functions f                                                                :   I   — |J Ai such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ieI
                                         \Ja =     A=       IJ    5.                                              (19)    f(i) £ Ai for all i el.                         // is     denoted
                                                                                                                                                                                            TT Ai.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    H   iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :                                                                                                                                                                                                           }




8                                                                    PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.    THE INTEGERS                                                    9



     If /     = {1,2,                     .   .       .
                                                           ,
                                                               7i},       the product J[                           A       is           often denoted by A                                                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X A2 X                  •   •           •   X An        <p    :   D —* D and ^ D — Z>' such that the following diagrams are commutative for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :          *
                                                                                                             iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      each / e /:
                                                            a n ), where a, e A for
and is identified with the set of all ordered ^-tuples (a u a 2                                                                                                                              ,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                             .   ,                                                        t


/= 1,2,      « just as in the case mentioned above, where 7={1,2}. A similar
               .   .       .    ,



notation is often convenient when / is infinite. We shall sometimes denote the
function fe JJ A by                                                 [a^ or simply {a,}, where /(0 = a, e A for each                                                                                                                     /   e I.
                                    iel
                                                  t                                                                                                                                                  t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ai                ,           \f
     If some Aj                            = 0, then JJ A =                                          {             since there can be no function f: I—*                                                                                                                  U A     {

                                                                                        iei                                                                                                                                                                                           Combining these gives for each / s / a commutative diagram
such that f(J) e ^y.
     If {     A        |
                               / s    /}          and {Bi                         \
                                                                                      i s       /}   are families of sets such that B{ <Z A t for each / e /,                                                                                                                                                                                                          dJ?Ld
then every function /-^ |J 5, may be considered to be a function / —*                                                                                                                                                                       U A. There-
                                                                                  iel                                                                                                                                                       iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *\ /*<
fore we consider JJ ft to be a subset of JJ A it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ai
                                                          itl                                                          iel                                                                                                                      __                                    Thus ip\p                   D — D is a map such that 7r,-(^) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JJ A — A k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         But by the proof above,
     Let JJ                    A be a Cartesian product. For each k I define a map                                                                                  e                                                          7r A         :                             >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :             >                                                      7rt for all / s /.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D — D is also such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x   ;




              iel                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iel                                   there is a unique map with this property. Since the map \ D                                                    :      *

by   /H f(k), or in the other notation, {a,} |— a*,                                                                                     >                       irk is       called the (canonical) projec-                                                                             li) = Ti for all /s /, we must have <f»p = 1^ by uniqueness. A similar argument
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7rt

tion of the product onto its kth component (or factor). If every A                                                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is nonempty,                         then each                       shows that ^<£> = D Therefore, is a bijection by (13) and D = JJ A is uniquely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \       >.                   (p                                                    {

Ti k is   surjective (see Exercise 7.6).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      determined up to a bijection.
     The product JJ A and its projections are precisely what we need in order
                                                                          {

                                                      iel

to prove:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Observe that the statement of Theorem 5.2 does not mention elements; it in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      volves only sets and maps. It says, in effect, that the product JJ A { is characterized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      by a certain universal mapping property. We shall discuss this concept with more pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cision when we deal with categories and functors below.
Theorem 5.2. Let                                                {
                                                                    Ai        |
                                                                                  i   e Ij       be a family of sets indexed by I. Then there exists a set
D, together with a family ofmaps tt^ D —> A                                                              {
                                                                                                             :                              A       |
                                                                                                                                                        i       s I)        with the following property: for
any set C and family ofmaps <p\ C —> Ai   e I                                               {        :                 |
                                                                                                                               i                    )
                                                                                                                                                        ,             C— D
                                                                                                                                                             there exists a unique map <p                                                                 :                   >

such that Ti(p = pi for alii el. Furthermore,                                                                                      D is uniquely determined up to a bijection.                                                                                                        6.     THE INTEGERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We do not intend to give an axiomatic development of the integers. Instead we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      assume that the reader is thoroughly familiar with the set Z of integers, the set
   The last sentence means that if D' is a set and {71-/ D' —» A i e 1} a family of                                                                                                  :                               t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N = 0,1 ,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of nonnegative integers (or natural numbers) the set N* = 1,2, ...
maps, which have the same property as D and 7r     then there is a bijection D — » D'.                                                                                                                                                                                                           {                 .   .       }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                                                                                              {
                                                                                                                                                {           t } ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of positive integers and the elementary properties of addition, multiplication, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      order. In particular, for all a,b,c e Z:

     PROOF OF 5.2. (Existence) Let Z) = XI A and let the ma P s ^ be the P r ojec-                                                                          i                                                                                                                                            (a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and (ab)c = a(bc) (associative laws);                                                      (23)
                                                                                                                                    iel

tions onto the ith components. Given                                                                               C and the maps                                                    (p if           define <p                  :       C — JJ Ai by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a + b = b + a and ab = ba (commutative laws);                                                                 (24)

ch  7c, where /XO = ^ (c) e A. It follows immediately that irup = & for all / s /. To
                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a(b + c) = ab + ac and (a + b)c = ac + be (distributive laws);                                                       (25)
show that (p is unique we assume that <p' C —» JJ A { is another map such that                                                      :


                                                                                                                                                                    iel                                                                                                                                            a +   = a and a\ = a (identity elements);                                                                  (26)
Ti <p'    =                                = <p'. To do this we must show that for each
                           for all / s / and prove that <p
c s C, <p(c), and <p'(c) are the same element of JJ A — that is, (p(c) and <p'(c) agree as                                                                                                                                                                                                          aeZ there exists —aeZ such that a + ( — «) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for each                                                                                                 (additive inverse);
                                                                                                                                                                {

                                                                                                                                            iel                                                                                                                                             we write a - 6 for a + (~b).                                                                                                      ^   }

functions on /: (<p(c))(i) = (<p'(c))(i) for all / s /. But by hypothesis and the definition
of 7rt we have for every / e /:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ab =           <=>    a =         or      b = 0;                            (28)


                                                                                         =                       = <p,<c) = /c(0 = (*<c))(i).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a < b          =*    a        +c<b+c              for all   c e Z;                     (29)
                                                           (<p'(c)X0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a < b      =>        ad < bd      for all    d s N*.                          (30)
  (Uniqueness) Suppose D' (with maps tt/ D'         A,) has the same property as                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                 —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We write a < b and b > a interchangeably and write a < b if a < b or a = b. The
D = JJ A. If we apply this property (for D) to the family of maps tt*' D' —> A}                                                                                                                                                     {             :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      absolute value \a\ of a e Z is defined to be a if a >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and —a if a < 0. Finally we
and also apply it (for D') to the family                                                                                   {       7r»          :       Z)      —       *    :
                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       we obtain (unique) maps                                                              assume as a basic axiom the
10                           PREREQUISITES AND PR ELI Mi N ARIES                                                                                                                                                                    6.       THE INTEGERS                                                                                                                                              11



Law of Well Ordering. Every nonempty subset S of N contains a least element (that                           assignment n |— x n defines a function                                                                                                                   <p   :   N — S with graph i?. Since (0,a) e R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *


is, an element b £ S such that b < c for all c £ S).
                                                                                                            we must have                                <^(0)                               = a. For                                      N, («,*„) = (n,v(n)) £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             each                 and hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n       e

                                                                                                                                                                since                                                   £ g. But (« + l>*n+i) £ ^ and the uniqueness of xn+                                                                                                                                i



In particular,       is   the least element of N.                                                           imply that <p(n                 + 1) = *w+ = fn (v(n)).                                             i



   In addition to the above we require certain facts from elementary number theory,
some of which are briefly reviewed here.                                                                           If      is a     nonempty set, then a sequence in A is a function N —*                                                                             A sequence is                                                          A
                                                                                                            usually denoted                         {<z             A>                          •       •       •}          o r {a;} iEN or {aj, where ^ £ ^ is the image of / £ N.
                                                                                                            Similarly a function N*                                                                                 A is also called a sequence and denoted {a u a 2                                                                                                                  ,   .   .   .}   or
                                                                                                                a i)ieN m or                this will cause no confusion in context.
Theorem 6.1. (Principle of Mathematical Induction) IfS is a subset of the set N of                          [


natural numbers such that             £ S and either


      (i)   n£S    =»     n + 1 £ S         for all n £ N;                                                  Theorem 6.3. (Division Algorithm) If a,b, £ Z                                                                                                                                             a    ^ 0, then there exists unique
                                                                                                            integers q and r swc/z //za/ b                                                                              = aq + r, and                                             < r < |a|.
or

     (ii)   m £ S for all         < m < n        =>   neS          for all n £ N;                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Show that the set S = {b - ax x £ Z, b - ax > 0) is                                                                                                                              \




then S = N.
                                                                                                                               N and therefore contains a least element r = b — aq (for some
                                                                                                            a nonempty subset of
                                                                                                            q £ Z). Thus b = aq -\- r. Use the fact that r is the least element in S to show
                                                                                                              < r < \a\ and the uniqueness of q,r.
   PROOF. If N - S ^ 0, let n ^ be its least element. Then for every m < n,
we must have m $ N — S and hence m e S. Consequently either (i) or (ii) implies
n £ S, which is a contradiction. Therefore                 N—S=              and N = S.
                                                                                                               We say that an integer a ^ divides an integer & (written a                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b) if there is an integer
                                                                                                            k such that ak = b.U a does not divide b we write a /f b.

     REMARK. Theorem 6.1 also holds with 0, N replaced by c, M = {x e Z x > c]            c             |




for any c e Z.
                                                                                                            Definition 6.4. The positive integer c is said to be the greatest common divisor of the
     In order to insure that various recursive or inductive definitions and proofs in the                   integers ai,a 2         ,   .   .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                            a n if:
sequel (for example, Theorems 8.8 and III. 3. 7 below) are valid, we need a technical
result:
                                                                                                                   (1) c
                                                                                                                   (2)
                                                                                                                           |




                                                                                                                         d £Z
                                                                                                                               ai       /or
                                                                                                                                            W < <               1

                                                                                                                                                                    d           |
                                                                                                                                                                                            i


                                                                                                                                                                                            ai                  /or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1    <       i       < n                  =>              d   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c.


                                                                                                            c is denoted (ai,a 2                    ,       .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                            a n ).

Theorem 6.2. (Recursion Theorem) IfS is a set, a £ S and for each n £ N, fn S —» S is               :




a function, then there is a unique function <p N —* S such that (p'(0) = a and <p(n + 1) =
                                                       :




fn (v?(n)) for every n £ N.                                                                                 Theorem 6.5. //ai,a 2                                                   ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a n are integers, not all 0, Merc (ai,a 2                                                                            ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a n ) exists.
                                                                                                            Furthermore there are integers ki,k 2                                                                                        ,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k n such that
     SKETCH OF PROOF. We shall construct a relation R on N X S that is the
graph of a function #         :   N —» S with the desired properties. Let g be the set of all                                                                   (ai,a 2 ,                                   .       .   .   ,   a n ) = kiai                          +ka H       2   2                     h k na n         .




subsets Y of      N X S such that
                                                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. Use the Division Algorithm to show that the least posi-
            (0,a) £ Y;     and      (n,x)   eY   =>    (n   +    1 ,/„(*))   £   Y   for all   n £ N.
                                                                                                                                         = {xm + x a H
                                                                                                            tive element of the nonempty set S
                                                                                                                                                              h x n a n x e Z,^2 XiQi > 0)                                                                                        2   2                                          \   {


Then g ^           since    N X S e g. Let R =              f)   Y\ then         R £ g. Let M be the sub-   is the greatest             common divisor of a u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,       a n For details see Shockley [51,p.l0].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




set ofN consisting of all those n £ N for which there exists a unique xn eS such that
          We shall prove M = N by induction. If $ M, then there exists (0,b) £ R
(n,x n ) £ R.                                                                                                      The integers a u a 2                             ,       .           .       .       ,       a n are said to be relatively prime if (a u a 2                                                                          ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       an ) =           1.   A
with b ^ a and the set ^ - {(0,Z>)| C N X S is in g. Consequently R = f| ^                                  positive integer/?                      >               1 is                    said to be prime if its only divisors are ±1 and ±p. Thus if/7
                                                                                                            is   prime and a e Z, either (a,p) = p (if p                                                                                                              a) or (a,p)                     = 1 (if p)fa).
<^ R  - {(0,b)}, which is a contradiction. Therefore, OeM. Suppose inductively that                                                                                                                                                                              \




n e M (that is, (az,jcJ e /? for a unique *„ e 5). Then (az + 1 /„(*„)) e ^ also. If
(n + l,c) e /? with c # /„(jt„) then /?-{(«+ l,c)}£g        (verify!), which leads to a

contradiction as above. Therefore, x n+Y = fn (x n ) is the unique element of S such                        Theorem 6.6. // a and b are relatively prime integers and                                                                                                                                           a.       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 be, then a                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c.       //p is
that (n + l,*n +i) £    Therefore by induction (Theorem 6.1) N = M, whence the                              prime and p             |
                                                                                                                                        aia 2               •   -a n , then p                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ai for some i.
12                                              PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                     7.   THE AXIOM OF CHOICE, ORDER, AND ZORN'S LEMMA                              13


     SKETCH OF PROOF. By Theorem 6.5 1 = ra + sb, whence c = rac + sbc.                                                               The Axiom of Choice. The product of a family of nonempty sets indexed by a non-
Therefore a                  \
                                 c.   The second statement now follows by induction on n.                                             empty set is nonempty.


                                                                                                                                            See Exercise 4 for another version of the Axiom of Choice. There are two propo-
Theorem 6.7. {Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic) Any positive integer n > I may                                                       sitions equivalent to the Axiom of Choice that are essential in the proofs of a number
be written uniquely in the form n = pi p2 t2> -pk tk where pi < p <     < pk are
                                                                           tl
                                                                                 •
                                                                                         ,                    2   •   •   •           of important theorems. In order to state these equivalent propositions we must
primes and U >                          for all i.                                                                                    introduce some additional concepts.
                                                                                                                                            A partially ordered set is a nonempty set A together with a relation R on A X A
     The proof, which proceeds by induction, may be found in Shockley [51, p.17].                                                     (called a partial ordering of A)       which is reflexive and transitive (see (15), (17) in
     Let m >                      be a fixed integer. If a,b e Z and m               |
                                                                                         (a   — b) then a is said to be con-          section 4) and
gruent to b modulo m. This is denoted by a = b (mod m).
                                                                                                                                                         antisymmetric (a,b) e R
                                                                                                                                                                        :            and        (b,a)   eR   =>   a = b.         (31)

                                                                                                                                      If   R is a partial ordering of A, then we usually write a < b in place of (a,b) e R. In
Theorem 6.8. Let m >                                     be an integer and a,b,c,d s Z.                                               this notation the conditions (15), (17), and (31) become (for all a,b,c e A):

       (i)       Congruence modulo m is an equivalence relation on the set of integers Z, which                                                                                    a < a;
has precisely                    m equivalence classes.                                                                                                         a < b       and   b < c    =>     a < c\
     (ii)    If a = b                  (mod m) and c = d (mod m), then a + c = b + d (mod m) and
                                                                                                                                                                a < b       and   b < a           a = b.
ac = bd (mod m).
     (iii)   // ab = ac (mod m) and a aazJ                                 m are relatively prime, then b = c (mod m).                We write a < b if a < b and a ^ b.
                                                                                                                                         Elements a,b e A are said to be comparable, provided a < b or b < a. However,
     PROOF, (i) The fact that congruence modulo m is an equivalence relation is an                                                    two given elements of a partially ordered set need not be comparable. A partial
easy consequence of the appropriate definitions. Denote the equivalence class of an                                                   ordering of a set A such that any two elements are comparable is called a linear
integer a by a and recall property (20), which can be stated in this context as:                                                      (or total or simple) ordering.

                                                        a = b    <=*       a = b (mod m).                                     (20')
                                                                                                                                         EXAMPLE. Let A be the power set (set of all subsets) of {1,2,3,4,5}. Define
    Given any a s Z, there are integers q and r, with < r < m, such that a = mq -\- r.                                                C < D if and only if C C D. Then A is partially ordered, but not linearly ordered
Hence a — r = mq and a = r (mod m)\ therefore, a = r by (20'). Since a was ar-                                                        (for example, {1,2}    and {3,4} are not comparable).
bitrary and      < r < m, it follows that every equivalence class must be one of
0,1,2,3,     . (m — 1). However, these m equivalence classes are distinct: for if
                 .   .
                         ,                                                                                                                 Let (A,<) be a partially ordered set. An element a s A is maximal in A if for every
  < / < j < m, then < (j — i) < m and m\(j — /). Thus i ^ j (mod m) and hence                                                         c e A which is comparable to a, c      < a; in other words, for all c e A, a < c        a = c.
1    J by (20'). Therefore, there are exactly m equivalence classes.                                                                  Note that if a is maximal, it need not be the case that c < a for all c s A (there may
    (ii) We are given m    a — b and m c — d. Hence m divides (a — b) + (c — d)
                                                    \                  \                                                              exist c e A that are not comparable to a). Furthermore, a given set may have many
 = (a + c) — (b + d) and therefore a + c = b + d (mod m). Likewise, m divides                                                         maximal elements (Exercise 5) or none at all (for example, Z with its usual ordering).
(a — b)c + (c — d)b and therefore divides ac — be + cb — db = ac — bd; thus                                                           An upper bound of a nonempty subset B of A is an element d e A such that b < d for
ac = bd (mod m).                                                                                                                      every b e B. A nonempty subset B of A that is linearly ordered by < is called a chain
    (iii) Since ab =     (mod m), m <?(& — c). Since (/w,tf) = 1, m b — c by Theo-
                                                                  |
                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                      in A.
rem 6.6, and thus b = c (mod m).

                                                                                                                                      Zorn's Lemma. If A is a nonempty partially ordered set such that every chain in A
                                                                                                                                      has an upper bound in A, then A contains a maximal element.
7.   THE AXIOM OF CHOICE, ORDER, AND ZORN'S LEMMA
                                                                                                                                         Assuming that all the other usual axioms of set theory hold, it can be proved that
     Note. In this section we deal only with sets.                                       No proper classes are involved.
                                                                                                                                      Zorn's Lemma is true if and only if the Axiom of Choice holds; that is, the two are

     If /                        and Ai{    \
                                                i   e /} is a family of sets such that         A^       for all / s /, then we
                                                                                                                                      equivalent   —see E. Hewitt and K. Stromberg [57; p. 14]. Zorn's             Lemma is a power-
                                                                                                                                      ful tool and will be used frequently in the sequel.
would like to know that JJ A { ^ 0. It has been proved that this apparently in-
                                                        iel                                                                                Let B be a nonempty subset of a partially ordered set (A,<). An element c e B is a
nocuous conclusion cannot be deduced from the usual axioms of set theory (al-                                                         least (or minimum) element of   B provided c < b for every b e B. If every nonempty
though it is not inconsistent with them                                     —
                                        see P. J. Cohen [59]). Consequently we                                                        subset of A has a least element, then A is said to be well ordered. Every well-ordered
shall assume                                                                                                                          set is linearly ordered (but not vice versa) since for all a,b e        A the subset {a,b} must
                  <


14                                              PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                            8.       CARDINAL NUMBERS                                                    15


have a least element; that is, a < b or b < a. Here is another statement that can be                                                                                      (a) If S   ^ 0, then the power set P(S) ordered by set-theoretic inclusion is a
proved to be equivalent to the Axiom of Choice (see E. Hewitt and K. Stromberg                                                                                      lattice, whichhas a unique maximal element.
[57; p.14]).                                                                                                                                                              Give an example of a partially ordered set which is not a lattice.
                                                                                                                                                                          (b)
                                                                                                                                                                     (c) Give an example of a lattice with no maximal element and an example of
                                                                                                                                                                   a partially ordered set with two maximal elements.
The Well Ordering Principle. // A is a nonempty set, then there exists a linear
                                                                                                                                                          2.       A lattice (A,<) (see Exercise 1) is said to be complete if every nonempty subset of
ordering < of         A such that (A,<) is well ordered.                                                                                                           A has both a least upper bound and a greatest lower bound. A map of partially
                                                                                                                                                                   ordered sets /: A — B is said to preserve order if a < a' in A implies f(a) < f(a')
                                                                                                                                                                                              >
       EXAMPLES. We have already assumed (Section 6) that the set N of natural                                                                                     in B. Prove that an order-preserving map /of a complete lattice A into itself has
numbers is well ordered. The set Z of all integers with the usual ordering by magni-
                                                                                                                                                                   at least one fixed element (that is, an a e A such that f(a) = a).
tude is linearly ordered but not well ordered (for example, the subset of negative
integers has no least element). However, each of the following is a well ordering of Z                                                                    3.       Exhibit a well ordering of the set                   Q of rational numbers.
(where by definition a < b                                    a is to the left of b):
                                                                                                                                                          4.       Let 5 be a set. A choice function for S is a function / from the set of all nonempty
        (i)    0,1,-1,2,-2,3,-3,                      .   .   .       ,   «,-/7,   .   .   .
                                                                                               ;
                                                                                                                                                                   subsets of S to S such that f(A) e A for alM                                 ^ 0,A (Z S. Show that the Axiom
       (ii)    0,1,3,5,7,   .   .   .           2,4,6,8,  -1,-2,-3,-4,
                                                              .       .   .                             .   .       .   ;
                                                                                                                                                                   of Choice is equivalent to the statement that every set S has a choice function.
                                            ,                                 ,


       (iii)   0,3,4,5,6, .     .   .
                                            ,
                                                -1,-2,-3,-4,     1,2.              .   .   .
                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                          5.       Let S be the set of all points (x,y) in the plane with y < 0. Define an ordering

These orderings are quite different from one another. Every nonzero element a in
                                                                                                                                                                   by (x u yi) < (x 2 ,y>2)   ^       xi   = x and y < y Show that this is a partial ordering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2    x             2.

                                                                                                                                                                   of 5, and that S has infinitely many maximal elements.
ordering (i) has an immediate predecessor (that is an element c such that a is the least
element in the subset x   c < x ). But the elements — 1 and 2 in ordering (ii) and — 1
                                        {        \                j                                                                                       6.       Prove that if all the sets in the family             A     s / ^{        /           }   are nonempty, then each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             {          |




and 1 in ordering (iii) have no immediate predecessors. There are no maximal ele-                                                                                  of the projections ir k        :
                                                                                                                                                                                                      YL ^ ~~* A k is surjective.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                '




ments in orderings (i) and (ii), but 2 is a maximal element in ordering (iii). The                                                                                                                    hi
element          is the least element in all three orderings.                                                                                             7.       Let (A, <) be a linearly ordered set. The immediate successor of a e A (if it exists)
                                                                                                                                                                                     in the set {x e A a < x] Prove that if A is well ordered by
                                                                                                                                                                   is the least element                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .



       The chief advantage of the well-ordering principle is that it enables us to extend                                                                          < then at most one element of A has no immediate successor. Give an example
                                                                                                                                                                      ,



the principle of mathematical induction for positive integers (Theorem 6.1) to any                                                                                 of a linearly ordered set in which precisely two elements have no immediate
well ordered set.                                                                                                                                                  successor.




Theorem 7.1. (Principle of Transfinite Induction) If B is a subset of a well-ordered
                                                                                                                                                         8.    CARDINAL NUMBERS
set (A,<) such that for every a e A,
                                                                                                                                                            The definition and elementary properties of cardinal numbers will be needed fre-
                                                     (ceA|c<a) CB                                  =>   a e B,                                           quently in the sequel. The remainder of this section (beginning with Theorem 8.5),
                                                                                                                                                         however, will be used only occasionally (Theorems II. 1.2 and IV.2.6; Lemma V.3.5;
then B = A.
                                                                                                                                                         Theorems V.3.6 and VI. 1.9). It may be omitted for the present, if desired.

    PROOF. If A — B y£ 0, then there is a least element a e A — B. By the defini-
tions of least element and A — B we must have {c e A c < a] CZ B. By hypothesis
                                                                                                                                                               Two sets, A and B, are said to be equipollent, if there exists a bijective map A — B;                                >


                                                                                                                                                                                 A ^ B.
                                                                                                                \




                                                                                                                                                         in this case we write
then, azB so that aeB f) (A — B) = 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore,
A -B =         and A = B. m
                                                                                                                                                         Theorem 8.1. Equipollence is an equivalence relation on the class S of all sets.

                                                                          EXERCISES                                                                            PROOF. Exercise; note that                           0^0          since              C       X    is   a relation that is
 1 .   Let (A, ) be a partially ordered set and B sl nonempty subset. A lower bound of B                                                                 (vacuously) a bijective function. 3
       is an element d e A such that d < b for every beB.A greatest lower bound (g.l.b.)

       of B is a lower bound do of B such that d < d for every other lower bound d ofB.                                                                        Let /            =    and for each n s N* let In = {1,2,3, ...,«}. It is not difficult to prove
       A least upper bound (l.u.b.) of B is an upper bound                                                              to   of B such that to < t for   that Im and In are equipollent if and only if                            m = n (Exercise 1). To say that a set A
       every other upper bound / of B. (A,<) is a lattice if for all a,b e A the set {a,b)
       has both a greatest lower bound and a least upper bound.                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                   See page 6.
16                           PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                        8.   CARDINAL NUMBERS                                   17



has precisely n elements means that A and In are equipollent, that is, that A and In are           and multiplication of the nonnegative integers with which they are identified; for if
in the same equivalence class under the relation of equipollence. Such a set A (with               A has m elements, B has n elements and A D B = 0, then A U B has m + n ele-
A ~ In for some unique n > 0) is said to be finite; a set that is not finite is infinite.          ments and A x B has mn elements (for more precision, see Exercise 6).
Thus, for a finite set A, the equivalence class of A under equipollence provides an
answer to the question; how many elements are contained in A? These considerations
motivate
                                                                                                   Definition 8.4. Let a,P be cardinal numbers and A,B sets such that \A\ = a,\B\ = p.
                                                                                                   a />Mss than or equal to p, denoted a < p or p > a, ifA is equipollent with a subset of
                                                                                                   B (that is, there is an injective map A — > B). a is strictly less than p, denoted a < p
Definition 8.2. The cardinal number (or cardinality) of a set A, denoted \A\, is the               or P > a, if a < P and a^P.
                  A under the equivalence relation ofequipollence. \A\is an infinite or
equivalence class of
finite cardinal according as      A is an infinite or finite set.
                                                                                                    It is easy to verify that the definition of < does not depend on the choice of A

                                                                                                and B (Exercise 7). It is shown in Theorem 8.7 that the class of all cardinal numbers
   Cardinal numbers will also be denoted by lower case Greek letters: a,p,y, etc.
                                                                                                is linearly ordered by < For finite cardinals < agrees with the usual ordering of the
For the reasons indicated in the preceding paragraph we shall identify the integer                                            .



                                                                                                nonnegative integers (Exercise 1). The fact that there is no largest cardinal number is
n >          with the cardinal number |/n and write |/n = n, so that the cardinal number
                                           |              |




                                                                                                an immediate consequence of
of a finite set is precisely the number of elements in the set.
    Cardinal numbers are frequently defined somewhat differently than we have done
so that a cardinal number is in fact a set (instead of a proper class as in Definition 8.2).
We have chosen this definition both to save time and because it better reflects the            Theorem 8.5. If A is a set and P(A) its power set, then |A| < |P(A)|.
intuitive notion of "the number of elements in a set." No matter what definition of
cardinality is used, cardinal numbers possess the following properties (the first two
of which are, in our case, immediate consequences of Theorem 8.1 and Defini-
                                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. The assignment a\-> {a} defines an injective map
                                                                                               A -> P(A) so that \A\ < \P(A)\. If there were a bijective map /: A -> P(A), then for
tion 8.2).
                                                                                               some a e A, f(a ) = B, where B = {a e A a $ f(a)\ <Z A. But this yields a con-
                                                                                                                                                  |




       (i) Every set has a unique cardinal number;                                             tradiction :aQ eB and a { B. Therefore \A    \P(A)\ and hence \A < \P(A)\.
                                                                                                                                              |                       |




      (ii) two sets have the same cardinal number if and only if they are equipollent

(\A\   = \B\^A~B);
                                                                                                  REMARK. By Theorem 8.5, Ho = |N| < \P(N)\. It can be shown that
      (iii)   the cardinal number of a finite set is the number of elements in the set.
                                                                                               |P(N)| = |R|, where R is the set of real numbers. The conjecture that there is no
Therefore statements about cardinal numbers are simply statements about equipol-               cardinal number p such that H < p < \P(N)\ = |R| is called the Continuum Hy-
lence of sets.                                                                                 pothesis. It has been proved to be independent of the Axiom of Choice and of the
                                                                                               other basic axioms of set theory; see P. J. Cohen [59].
   EXAMPLE. The cardinal number of the set N of natural numbers is customarily
denoted Ho (read "aleph-naught"). A set A of cardinality Ho (that is, one which is                The remainder of this section is devoted to developing certain facts that will be
equipollent to N) is said to be denumerable. The set N*, the set Z of integers, and the        needed at several points in the sequel (see the first paragraph of this section).
set   Q of rational numbers are denumerable (Exercise 3), but the set R of real numbers
is not    denumerable (Exercise 9).

                                                                                               Theorem 8.6. (Schroeder-Bernstein) If A and B are sets such that \A\ < |B| and
                                                                                               |B|<|A|,//z^|A| = |B|.
Definition 8.3. Let a and /3 be cardinal numbers. The sum a             +
                                                                P is defined to be the
cardinal number |A U B|, where A and B are disjoint sets such that |A| = a and
|B| = p. The product a/3 is defined to be the cardinal number |A X B|.                             SKETCH OF PROOF. By hypothesis there are injective maps /: A ->£ and
                                                                                               g  B -> A. We shall use /and g to construct a bijection h :A->B. This will imply
                                                                                                   :




    It is not actually necessary for A and B to be disjoint in the definition of the           that A ~ B and hence \A\ = \B\. If a e A, then since g is injective the set g~\a) is

product a0 (Exercise 4). By the definition of a cardinal number a there always                 either empty (in which case we say that a is parentless) or consists of exactly one ele-

exists a set A such that \A\ = a. It is easy to verify that disjoint sets, as required for     ment bzB (in which case we write g~\d) = b and say that b is the parent of a).
                                                                    +
                                                               P and product aP are in-        Similarly for btzB,we have either f~\b) =  (b is parentless) or f~\b) = a' e A
the definition of a    p, always exist and that the sum a
                         +
dependent of the choice of the sets A,B (Exercise 4). Addition and multiplication of           (a' is the parent of b). If   we continue to trace back the "ancestry" of an element a e A
cardinals are associative and commutative, and the distributive laws hold (Exercise            in this manner, one of three things must happen. Either we reach a parentless ele-

5). Furthermore, addition and multiplication of finite cardinals agree with addition           ment in A (an ancestor of a e A), or we reach a parentless element in B (an ancestor
                                                       »                                .;                  ;;




18                                 PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                                     8.       CARDINAL NUMBERS                                                                                19


of a), or the ancestry of a e A can be traced back forever {infinite ancestry). Now de-                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. If B is a finite subset of the infinite set A, then A — Bis
fine three subsets of          A [resp. B] as follows:                                                                                              nonempty. For each finite subset B of A, choose an element x B e A — B (Axiom of
                                                                                                                                                    Choice). Let F be the set of all finite subsets of A and define a map /: F —» F by
                         Ai =   a e A            a has a parentless ancestor in A
                                                                                                                                                    f(B) = B\J \x B }. Choose as. A. By the Recursion Theorem 6.2 (with f = / for
                                    {        \                                                          }



                         A2  = {a e A        |
                                                 a has a parentless ancestor in B]                          ;
                                                                                                                                                    all n) there exists a function <p                       :   N — F such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   »

                         ^ = {ae A
                           3                 \
                                                 a has infinite ancestry}
                                                                                                                                                                   *<0) = [a]              and        <p(n      + 1) = f(<p(n)) = <p(n) U {*,                                      (n) }       (n       > 0).
                         2?i =  b £ i?
                                    {        |
                                                 £ has a parentless ancestor in A                       }



                         2? = {beB
                           2                 \
                                                 b has a parentless ancestor in B\                          ;
                                                                                                                                                    Let g     :   N — A be the function defined by
                                                                                                                                                                       »


                         2? =                    £ has infinite ancestry}                                                                                                             = a; g(l) = x^o) = x {a]
                           3      £ Z?       |
                                                                                                                                                                           g(0)                                              ;    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ;       g(n      + 1) = x           vin) ;


Verify that the A { [resp. B l] are pairwise disjoint, that their union is A [resp. B] that                                                 \       Use the order properties of N and the following facts to verify that g is injective:
f\ Ai is a bijection Ai
                                   — 2? for = 1,3; and that g B is a bijection Z? — ^2. Con-
                                    »   t        /                                     2                                2       »
                                                                                                                                                                                                     > 0;
                                                                                   \




sequently the map h            :   A^B given as follows                   is   a well-defined bijection:
                                                                                                                                                            (i)

                                                                                                                                                           (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                  g(n) s ip(n) for all n
                                                                                                                                                                  g(n)$<p(n - 1) for all n >                      1;
                                                                                                                                                          (iii)   g(n) £ <p(m) for all               m < n.
                                                           _l (a)
                                                      [g             if   ^ £^ 2   .
                                                                                                                                                    Therefore Im g is a subset of ^ such that |Im g\                                                      = |N| = S           .




Theorem 8.7. 77z£ c/ass 0/ a// cardinal numbers is linearly ordered by <                                                    .   If a and ($         Lemma 8.9. /fA is an infinite set and F a finite set then A U F| = A| In particular,                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




are cardinal numbers, then exactly one of the following is true:                                                                                    a + n = a for every infinite cardinal number a and every natural number (finite
                                                                                                                                                cardinal) n.
                           a < P\           a = 0;            (3    < a   (Trichotomy Law).

                                                                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. It suffices to assume A D F =     (replace F by F - A
   SKETCH OF PROOF. It is easy to verify that < is a partial ordering. Let a,(3                                                                 if necessary). If F = {b u b ...,£„} and D = \x e N*| is a denumerable subset of
                                                                                                                                                                                               2,                                             {       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i

be cardinals and A,B be sets such that A\ = a, \B\ = We shall show that < is a
                                                                \
                                                                                       fi.                                                      A (Theorem 8.8), verify that /: A -> A U F is a bijection, where /is given by
linear ordering (that is, either a                   < (3 or (3 < a) by applying Zorn's Lemma to the set
SF   of all pairs (fiX), where A'            C A and f:X—>Bis an injective map. Verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^          for   A"       = x         t ,      1   <   i   < n\
SF   ^          and that the ordering of SF given by (f,Xi) < (f2 ,X2 ) if and only if X X2                                             Y   C                                            f(x) =         Xi_ n          for   x = .xv, i > n;
and f2 \Xi = f is a partial ordering of SF. If ((   / £ /) is a chain in SF, let           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                        x              for   x £ ^ — Z).
X = (jXi and define f:X^>B by /(*) = /(*) for * £ A^-. Show that /is a well-de-
         t'eJ

fined injective map, and that (fX) is an upper bound in SF of the given chain. There-
fore by Zorn's Lemma there is a maximal element (g,X) of $F.                                           We claim that either                     Theorem 8.10. //a                               /5   ^/-^   cardinal numbers such that f3 < a and a is infinite,
X = A or Im g = B. For if both of these statements were false we could find a A — X                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                then a + (3 = a.

and b e B — Im g and define an injective map h X U [a) — B by /z(x) = gU) for  :                   »

jc   £*and     = b. Then (/*,* U {a}) e <F and (g,*) < (h,X U {a}), which contra-                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. It suffices to prove a + a - a (simply verify that
dicts the maximality of (g,X). Therefore either X = A so that |^| <    or Im g = 5                               |Z?|                           oi<a-\-(3<a + a = a and apply the Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem to conclude
                                  —                                                                                                             a + (3 = a). Let ^ be a set with |^| = a and let SF be the set of all pairs (fiX),
in which case the injective map 5    X C ^ shows that \B\ < \A\. Use these facts, the
Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem 8.6 and Definition 8.4 to prove the Trichotomy
                                                                                                                                                whereX C A and/:X X {0,1} -^Xis a bijection. Partially order <F by extension
                                                                                                                                                (as in the proof of Theorem 8.7) and verify that the hypotheses of Zorn's Lemma are
Law.
                                                                                                                                                satisfied. The only difficulty is showing that $ ^ 0. To do this note that the map

      REMARKS. A family of functions partially ordered as in the proof of Theorem
                                                                                                                                                N X {0,1 -> N given by (n,0) h> 2n and (n,\) \-> In + is a bijection. Use this fact
                                                                                                                                                                   }                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                to construct a bijection /: D X {0,1 -> £>, where D is a denumerable subset of ^
8.7 is said to be ordered by extension. The proof of the theorem is a typical example
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   }



                                                                                                                                                (that is, |D| = |N| see Theorem 8.8). Therefore by Zorn's Lemma there is a maximal
of the use of Zorn's Lemma. The details of similar arguments in the sequel will fre-
                                                                                                                                                                                  ;



                                                                                                                                                element (g,C) e 3.
quently be abbreviated.
                                                                                                                                                          ClearlyC = {(c,0) c s C\ and d = {(c,l) c £ C\ are disjoint sets such that
                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |




                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                    Co|    = \C\ = |d| and CX {0,1} = C U d. The map g C X {0,1} -> C is a bi-                                          :




Theorem 8.8. Every infinite set has a denumerable subset In particular, Ho < a for             .
                                                                                                                                                jection. Therefore by Definition 8.3,

every infinite cardinal number a.
                                                                                                                                                                       |C|   = \CX {0,1}| = |Co U d| = |Co| + Idl = |C| + |C|.
                                                                                                                                                          >




    20                                            PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES                                                                                                                        8.       CARDINAL NUMBERS                                                                               21


To complete the proof we shall show that \C\ = a. If A — C were infinite, it would                                                                            Corollary 8.13. If A is an infinite set and F(A) the set of all finite subsets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of A then
    contain a denumerable subset B by Theorem 8.8, and as above, there would be a bi-                                                                         |F(A)|       = |A|.
jection f  B X {0,1 — B. By combining f with g, we could then construct a bijec-
                            :             j        >


      h  (C U 5) X 0,1 -> C U 5 so that fe,C) < (/r,C Ufi)eJ, which would                                                                                        PROOF. The map A -> F(^) given by
tion           :                              {        J                                                                                                                                                      {«} is injective so that                                           M < \F(A)\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I




contradict the maximality of (g,C). Therefore A — C must be finite. Since A is in-                                                                            For each ^-element subset 5 of A choose fa, ...,*„) e /4 n such that 5 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     au    .    .           an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {

finite and A = C U {A — C), C must also be infinite. Thus by Lemma 8.9, |C| =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .            }
                                                                                                                                                              This defines an injective map F(A) -*                           ^« so that \F(A)\ <                               = ^ |^| = L4I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \J A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |J                                  \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \




\C U (A - C)| = Ml = a.      m                                                                                                                                by Theorems 8.11 and 8.12. Therefore, \A\ = \F(A)\ by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Schroeder-Bernstein
                                                                                                                                                              Theorem 8.6.
    Theorem 8.11. If a and fi are cardinal numbers such that =£ fi < a and a is
    infinite, then a/2 = a; in particular, c*X = a and if fi is finite Xq/? = X                                                    .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXERCISES
    SKETCH OF PROOF. Since a < a/3 < aa it suffices (as in the proof of Theo-                                                                                  1.    Let /o =         and
                                                                                                                                                                                        for each n e      let /„  N*              =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   { 1,2,3, ...,«}.


rem 8.10) to prove aa = a. Let A be an infinite set with \A\ = a and let £F be the set                                                                               (a) /n is not equipollent to any of its proper subsets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [Hint: induction].
of all bijections /: X X        where X is an infinite subset of A. To show that                                                                                     (b) Im and /„ are equipollent if and only if                      m = n.
£F   0, use the facts that A has a denumerable subset D (so that \D\ = |N| = |N*|)                                                                                   (c)   Im is equipollent to a subset of In but /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n is not equipollent to               any subset of Im
and that the map N* X N* — > N* given by (m,n) |—» 2 m ~\2n — 1) is a bijection.                                                                                           if and   only if m < n.
Partially order £F by extension and use Zorn's Lemma to obtain a maximal element
                                                                                                                                                               2.    (a)   Every infinite set is equipollent to one of its proper subsets.
g :B X B^B. By the definition of g, \B\\B\ = \B X B\ = \B\. To complete the proof                                                                                    (b)   A set is finite if and only if it is not equipollent to one of its proper subsets
we shall show that \B\ = \A\ = a.                                                                                                                                          [see Exercise 1].
   Suppose \A — B\ > \B\. Then by Definition 8.4 there is a subset C of A — B such
that \C\                    = \B\. Verify that \C\ = |£| = |£ X B\ = IB X C| = \C X £| = \C X C|                                                               3.   (a)    Z is a denumerable set.
and that these sets are mutually disjoint. Consequently by Definition 8.3 and Theo-                                                                                 (b)    The set Q of rational numbers                          is       denumerable.           [Hint-             show               that
rem 8.10 \(B U C) X (B U Ol = l(# X B) U (B X C) U (C X B) U (C X C)|                                                                                                      \n < IQI < |z x z| = \z\.]
= |£ X *| + \B X C| + \C X *| + |C X C\ = (\B\ + |*|) + (|C| + \C\) = \B\ +
                                                                                                                                                              4. If A,A\B,B' are sets such that \A\               = \A'\ and \B\ = \B'\, then \A X B\ = \A' X B'\
\C\ = \B U C\ and there is a bijection (B U C) X (5 U C) -* (5 U C), which con-
                                                                                                                                                                    If in addition         A H B =            = A' f) B', then \A U B\ = \A' U B'\. Therefore
tradicts the maximality of g in 5\ Therefore, by Theorems 8.7 and 8. 10 A - \B\                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                    multiplication and addition of cardinals is well defined.
and      = \A - B\ + \B\ = |(/* - 5) U B\ = \A\ = a.
                                                                                                                                                              5.    For all cardinal numbers a,0,y:
                                                                                                                                                                    (a)    a + (3 =
                                                                                                                                                                                  + a and a(3 = f3a (commutative laws).
Theorem 8.12. Le/ A be a set and for each integer n > 1 /e/ A n = A X A X                                                                              XA                  + 0) + y = a + (0 + y) and (a/3)y = a((3y) (associative laws).
                                                                                                                                           •   •   •

                                                                                                                                                                    (b) (a
(n factors).
                                                                                                                                                                    (c) a(0 + y) = ap + ay and (a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   + 0) 7 = ay + 0y (distributive laws).
         (i)  //A /j /z/iz/e, //7^A7 |A n = |A| n and if A is infinite, then |A n = |A|.
                                                                   |             ,                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                    (d)    a -f     = a and al = a.
                                                                                                                                                                           If a 9* 0, then there is no
         (ii)  U A n = No|A|.
                   |




                           neN*
                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                    (e)                                            such that a         +       =  and if a * 1, then there is
                                                                                                                                                                           no     such that a$ =     1. Therefore subtraction                  and division of cardinal num-
                                                                                                                                                                           bers cannot be defined.
         SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) is trivial if \A\ is finite and may be proved by induc-
tion on n if \A\is infinite (the case n = 2 is given by Theorem 8.11). (ii) The sets
                                                                                                                                                              6.                             ~ Im and B ~ I and
                                                                                                                                                                    Let In be as in Exercise 1. If A                 5 =            U 5)
                                                                                                                                                                    — 4+n and ^ X B ~ Imn Thus we identify \A\ with w and0, with «, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           then            n       /4   fl                                (/4

A n (n> 1) are mutually disjoint. If A is infinite, then by (i) there is for each n a bijec-                                                                                                         .              if                                              \B\

tion fn A n — A. The map |J A n — N* X /4 which sends «e/l n onto (njn (u)), is a
               :                  >                                          >         ,
                                                                                                                                                                    \A\    + \B\= m + n and                       = mn.
                                                           neN*
bijection. Therefore                                       n           = |N* X A\ = |N*||/4| = fcto|/4|. (ii) is obviously true                               7. \IA~,A\ B ^B' and f:A-+B is injective, then there is an injective map
                                              |   |J /4        |




                                                  neN*                                                                                                           A' ->    Therefore the relation < on cardinal numbers is well
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               defined.
if ^ = 0. Suppose, therefore, that /4 is nonempty and finite. Then each A is non-
                                                                         n

                                                                                                                                                              8. An infinite subset of a denumerable set is
empty and it is easy to show that ^ = |N*| <        An Furthermore each A n is             |   U       \-                                                                                                   denumerable.
                                                                                               neN*
                                                                                                                                                                    The infinite set of real numbers R is not denumerable
finite     and there is for each n an injective map gn                                          :   A n — N*. The map
                                                                                                        >                                 |J       An —       9.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (that is, K < |R|). [Hint                                                      •




                                                                                                                                         neN*                       it suffices to show that the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                      interval (0,1) is not denumerable by Exercise 8.
N* X N*, which sends u z A n onto (n,gn (u)) is injective so that                                           |   U A        n
                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                       < |N* X N*|                  You may assume each real number can be written as an infinite decimal.
                                                                                                                neN*                                                                                                                           If (0 1) is
    = |N*| = N by Theorem 8.11. Therefore by the Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem                                                                                        denumerable there is a bijection/: N*                     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0,1). Construct an infinite decimal (real
                                                                                                                                                                    number) .a,a r   in (0,1) such that a n is not the n\h digit in the decimal
I    U ^ n = No. But No = &q\A\ since A is finite (Theorem 8.11).
                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                       •   •




                                                                                                                                                                    of f(n). This number cannot be in Im/.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                expansion
22                          PREREQUISITES AND PRELIMINARIES

10. If aft are cardinals, define a           to be the cardinal number of the set of all functions
      B — A, where A,B are sets such that \A\ = a, \B\ = ft
      (a) a' is independent of the choice of A,B.
               3



      (b)           =
                  (a0(« 7 (a0) 7);  (<* 7 7  =  7
                                                 )(£ );   ^ = (a^    7   -




      (c)    If a   < ft then   < p.
      (d) If a,/? are finite with a > l,fi>    1 and y is infinite, then a = fi
                                                                          7     y
                                                                                              .




      (e)    For every finite cardinal n, a n = aa- a (n factors). Hence a n = a if a is
                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER             |
             infinite.

      (0 If P(A) is the power set of a set A, then |P(^)| = 2
                                                              ,A|
                                                                             .




11. If / is an infinite set, and for each i s /           A is a finite set, then ||J A < |/|.
                                                           {                                      {   \
                                                                                                                                               GROUPS
12.   Let a be a fixed cardinal number and suppose that for every                /'
                                                                                      s /,   A is a set with
                                                                                                  {


      \At\   - a. Then |(J A < \I\a. t   \




                           ui




                                                                                                               The concept of a group is of fundamental importance in the study of algebra. Groups
                                                                                                               which are, from the point of view of algebraic structure, essentially the same are said
                                                                                                               to be isomorphic. Ideally the goal in studying groups is to classify all groups up to
                                                                                                               isomorphism, which in practice means finding necessary and sufficient conditions for
                                                                                                               two groups to be isomorphic. At present there is little hope of classifying arbitrary
                                                                                                               groups. But it is possible to obtain complete structure theorems for various restricted
                                                                                                               classes of groups, such as cyclic  groups (Section 3), finitely generated abelian
                                                                                                               groups (Section II.2), groups satisfying chain conditions (Section II. 3) and finite
                                                                                                               groups of small order (Section II. 6). In order to prove even these limited structure
                                                                                                               theorems, it is necessary to develop a large amount of miscellaneous information
                                                                                                               about the structure of (more or less) arbitrary groups (Sections 1, 2, 4, 5, and 8 of
                                                                                                               Chapter I and Sections 4 and 5 of Chapter II). In addition we shall study some classes
                                                                                                               of groups whose structure is known in large part and which have useful applications
                                                                                                               in other areas of mathematics, such as symmetric groups (Section 6), free [abelian]
                                                                                                               groups (Sections 9 and II. 1), nilpotent and solvable groups (Sections II. 7 and II. 8).
                                                                                                                  There is a basic truth that applies not only to groups but also to many other
                                                                                                               algebraic objects (for example, rings, modules, vector spaces, fields): in order to
                                                                                                               study effectively an object with a given algebraic structure, it is necessary to study as
                                                                                                               well the functions that preserve the given algebraic structure (such functions are
                                                                                                               called homomorphisms). Indeed a number of concepts that are common to the
                                                                                                               theory of groups, rings, modules, etc. may be described completely in terms of ob-
                                                                                                               jects and homomorphisms. In order to provide a convenient
                                                                                                                                                                      language and a useful
                                                                                                               conceptual framework in which to view these common concepts, the notion of a
                                                                                                               category is introduced in Section 7 and used frequently thereafter. Of course it is
                                                                                                               quite possible to study groups, rings, etc. without ever mentioning categories. How-
                                                                                                               ever, the small amount of effort needed to comprehend this notion now will pay large
                                                                                                               dividends later in terms of increased understanding of the fundamental relationships
                                                                                                               among the various algebraic structures to be encountered.
                                                                                                                  With occasional exceptions such as Section 7, each section in this chapter de-
                                                                                                               pends on the sections preceding it.

                                                                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                                          R



24                                                 CHAPTER      I     GROUPS                                                                                1.       SEMIGROUPS, MONOIDS AND GROUPS                                             25



                                                                                                                                  If     G is a monoid and the binary operation is written multiplicatively, then the
1.    SEMIGROUPS, MONOIDS AND GROUPS                                                                                      identity element of G will always be denoted e. If the binary operation is written

      If       G is a nonempty set, a binary operation on G is a function G X G — G. There                            additively, then a -f- /; (a, b s G) is called the sum of a and /?, and the identity element

are several commonly used notations for the image of (a,b) under a binary operation:                                  is      denoted 0; if G is a group the inverse of a i G is denoted by —a. We write a — b
ab (multiplicative notation), a + b (additive notation), ab,              For con-      a * b, etc.                   for a 4- (                 — b)- Abelian groups are frequently written additively.
venience we shall generally use the multiplicative notation throughout this chapter                                               The axioms used in Definition 1.1 to define a group can actually be weakened
and refer to ab as the product of a and b. A set may have several binary operations                                   considerably.
defined on it (for example, ordinary addition and multiplication on Z given by
(a,b) \-^> a         + b and (a,b) H> ab respectively).
                                                                                                                      Proposition 1.3. Let G be a semigroup. Then G is a group if and only if the following
                                                                                                                      conditions hold:

Definition 1.1.                   A semigroup is a nonempty set G together with a binary operation                                 (i)       there exists an element e £        G such that ea = a for all a £ G (left identity
on    G which is                                                                                                                         element);
                                                                                                                                  (ii)   for each a £ G, there exists an element a
                                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  £       G such that a _1 a = e (left inverse).
       (i)       associative: a(bc)        = (ab)c for all      sl,   b, c s G;


a monoid is a semigroup                  G which contains a                                                                       REMARK. An analogous result holds for "right inverses" and a "right identity."
      (ii)      (two-sided) identity element e s              G such that ae = ea = a for all a e G.                              SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.3. (=>) Trivial. (t=) Note that Theorem 1.2(i) is
                                                                                                                      true under these hypotheses. G ^     since e e G. If a e G, then by (ii) (aa~ )(aa~ )                             l       l

A group is a monoid G such that
                                                                                                                      = a(a~ a)a~ = a(ea~ ) = cur and hence aar = e by Theorem 1.2(i). Thus a" is a
                                                                                                                                         1         1             l         1              1                                                 1




      (iii)     for every a s         G there exists a (two-sided) inverse element a -1 s G such that                 two-sided inverse of a. Since ae = a(a~ a) = (aa~ )a = ea = a for every a £ G, e is a
                                                                                                                                                                                   l                  l




                 a
                     _1
                          a = aa
                                 _1
                                    = e.                                                                              two-sided identity. Therefore G is a group by Definition 1.1.


A semigroup G is said to be abelian or commutative // its binary operation is

      (iv)       commutative: ab = ba for all a,b s G.
                                                                                                                      Proposition                      1.4. Let      G be a semigroup. Then G is a group if and only if for all
                                                                                                                      a,   b £ G the equations ax = b and ya = b have solutions in G.
      Our principal interest is in groups. However, semigroups and monoids are con-
venient for stating certain theorems in the greatest generality. Examples are given                                               PROOF. Exercise; use Proposition 1.3.
below. The order of a group G is the cardinal number |C7|.                              G is said to be finite
[resp. infinite] if |C7| is finite [resp. infinite].
                                                                                                                                  EXAMPLES. The integers Z, the rational numbers Q, and the real numbers R
                                                                                                                      are each infinite abelian groups under ordinary addition. Each                                      is   a monoid under
                                                                                                                      ordinary multiplication, but not a group (0 has no inverse). However, the nonzero
                                                                                                                      elements ofQ and R respectively form infinite abelian groups under multiplication.
Theorem 1.2. // G is a monoid, then the identity element e is unique. If G is a group,                                The even integers under multiplication form a semigroup that is not a monoid.
then
                                                                                                                           EXAMPLE. Consider the square with vertices consecutively numbered 1,2,3,4,
        (i)        G and cc = c => c = e;
                 c e
                                                                                                                      center at the origin of the x-y plane, and sides parallel to the axes.
       (ii)     for all  b, c s G ab = ac ==> b = c and ba = ca => b = c (left and right-
                                sl,


                 cancellation);
                                                                      -1
      (iii)     for each a e G, the inverse element a                      is unique;
                                           -1 -1
      (iv)      for each a s G, (a           )     = a;
       (v)      for a, b s G, (ab)- 1 = b^a" 1            ;



      (vi)      for        a, b s G the equations ax = b and ya = b have unique solutions in
                 G     :
                                 _1
                           x = a b and y = ba
                                               -1
                                                      .




      SKETCH OF PROOF. If e' is also a two-sided identity, then e = ee' = e'.
(i)   cc = c => c~ l (cc) = c~ l c => (c~ l c)c = c~ l c => ec = e => c = e;               (ii),   (iii)   and (vi)   Let  A* be the following set of "transformations" of the square. D * =                                                4

are proved similarly, (v) (ab)(b~ l ar l ) = a(bb~ l )a~ l = (ae)a~ l = aa~ l = e ==> (ab)"
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                      {   R ,R ,I,TXi Tyi Tlt3i T2,4} where R is a counterclockwise rotation about the center of
                                                                                                                              9
                                                                                                                                    2        3
                                                                                                                                                                      ,


= b~ a~ by (iii); (iv) is proved similarly.
           l     l
                                                                                                                      90°, R 2 a counterclockwise rotation of 180°, R a counterclockwise rotation of 270°
                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                              .




26                                                                   CHAPTER            I     GROUPS                                                                                                            1.   SEMIGROUPS, MONOIDS AND GROUPS


and / a rotation of 360° (=0°); Tx is a reflection about the x axis, TltZ a reflection                                                                               An equivalence relation on a monoid G that satisfies the hypothesis of the theo-
about the diagonal through vertices 1 and 3; similarly for Ty and'r2 ,4. Note that                                                                                rem is called a congruence relation on G.
each Us D 4 * is a bijection of the square onto itself. Define the binary operation in
D4 * to be composition of functions: for U,V e D *, U ° Vis the transformation Vfol-                  4
                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF OF 1.5. If ai = a and bi = b (ai, bi e G), then a ~ a and b\ y b by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2                          2                                      x                   2                       2


lowed by the transformation U. D                                             4
                                                                               * is a nonabelian group of order 8 called the group                                (20) of Introduction, Section 4. Then by hypothesis                                                                     ~                             so that                      = « ^2 2

                                                                                                                                                                  by (20) again. Therefore the binary operation in G/R is well defined (that is, inde-
of symmetries of the square. Notice that each symmetry (element of D 4 *) is com-
                                                                                                                                                                  pendent of_the c hoice of equiv alence class representatives). It is associative since
pletely determined by its action on the vertices.
                                                                                                                                                                  a(b c) = a(bc) = a(bc) = (ab)c = (ab)c = (a b)c. e                                                               is    the identity element since
                                                                                                                                                                  (a)(e) = ae = a = ea = (e)(a). Therefore G/R is a monoid. If G is a group, then
    EXAMPLE. Let 5 be a nonempty set and A(S) the set of all bijections S-^S.                                                                                     a s G/R clearly has inverse a~ so that G/R is also a group. Similarly, G abelian im-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l


Under the operation of composition of functions, /° g, A(S) is a group, since com-                                                                                plies G/R abelian.
position is associative, composition of bijections is a bijection, l s is a bijection, and
every bijection has an inverse (see (13) of Introduction, Section 3). The elements of                                                                                 EXAMPLE. Let m be a fixed integer. Congruence modulo m is a congruence re-
A(S) are called permutations and A(S) is called the group of permutations on the                                                                                  lation on the additive group  Z by Introduction, Theorem 6.8. LetZm denote the set
set S. If 5 = {1,2,3,      n) then A(S) is called the symmetric group on n letters and
                                      .   .   .
                                                   ,         ,
                                                                                                                                                                  of equivalence classes of Z under congruence modulo m. By Theore m 1.5 (w ith addi-
denoted S n Verify that |5„| = n\ (Exercise 5). The groups S n play an important
                .
                                                                                                                                                                  tive notation)                Zm is an abelian group, with addition given by a + b = a + b a,b e Z).                                                                       (
role in the theory of finite groups.                                                                                                                              The proof of Introduction, Theorem 6.8 shows thatZm = {0,1,                                                                                   .   .   .   ,   m—       1 j         so that
                                                                                                                                                                  Zm is a finite group of order m under addition. Zm is called the (additive) group of
   Since an element a ofS n is a function on the finite set 5 ={ 1 ,2, ...,«}, it can be                                                                          integers modulo m. Similarly since Z is a commutative monoid under multiplication,
described by listing the elements of 5 on a line and the image of each element under a                                                                            and congruence modulo m is also a congruence relation with respect to multiplica-
                                              2          3                                                                                                        tion (Introduction, Theorem 6.8), Zm is a commutative monoid, with multiplication
directly below it            *                                           "              The product or of two elements of S„ is the
                                                                                                                                                                  given by (a)(b) = ah (a,b e Z). Verify that for all a, b, c eZm
                                  l                                                J.
                                  \h          k          h                     in/                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




composition function r followed by a; that is, the function onS given byk\-+ (r(r(k))}                                                                                                   a(b -\- c) = ab             +        ac              and              (a -f Z?)c    = ac + 5c (distributivity).
                                                         2
For instance, let a =                                                             and r =                                        be elements of Sa Then
                                          Q                          *
                                                                             4)                      (4     l       2       3)
                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                  Furthermore if p is prime, then the nonzero elements of Zv form a multiplicative
                                                                                                                    (\       2     3   4\/l     2   3   4\        group of order p — 1 (Exercise 7). It is custo mary to denote the elements of Zw as
under ar,           1   |-> cr(r(l))                   = cr(4) = 4, etc.; thus err =                                (                    H                        0,1,      m — 1 rather than 0,1,         m — 1. In context this ambiguous notation
                                                                                                                        3    ^     2   4    4   x   2    3/              .   .   .   ,                                                         .   .   .   ,



                                                                                                                                         A
 =   /l
     V4
            2
            3
                    3
                    1
                          4\
                           2y
                                 );
                                      similarly, ^ =
                                      .           .,




This example also shows that S n need not be abelian.
                                                     A   ,




                                                                               ^
                                                                                        2
                                                                                        x
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                 2    ^
                                                                                                      4\A               2
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                  4\ _
                                                                                                                                  4J
                                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                                                           \2
                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                        4\        will cause no difficulty and will be used whenever convenient.


                                                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE. The following relation on the additive group Q of rational numbers
                                                                                                                                                                  is   a congruence relation (Exercise 8):
    Another source of examples is the following method of constructing new groups
from old. Let G and H be groups with identities eG en respectively, and define the                              ,                                                                                                                         a    ~b                 a — b sZa.
direct product of G and Hio be the group whose underlying set is G X H and
                                                                            whose
                                                                                                                                                                  By Theorem 1.5 the set of equivalence c lasses (denoted Q/Z) is an (infinite) abelian
binary operation is given by:                                                                                                                                     group, with addition given by a                                             + h = a + b. Q/Z                    is    called the group of rationals
                                                                                                                                                                  modulo one.
                             (a,b)(a',b')                        = (aa',bb'),               where          a, a' e G; b,b' e H.


                                                            and G X       involved in this                          H                  H                              Given a u      a n £ G (n > 3) it is intuitively plausible that there are many ways
Observe that there are three different operations in G,
                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,



                                                                                if both G                                                                         of inserting parentheses in the expression aA a 2    -a n so as to yield a "meaningful"
statement. It is easy to verify that G X His, in fact, a group  that    abelian                                                                                                                                                                                          -   •
                                                                     is

                                     and {a~ Jr )
                                               l
                                                  the inverse of (a,b). Clearly  \G X H\ l                                                                        product in G of these n elements in this order. Furthermore it is plausible that any
and //are; (eG ,eH ) is the identity
= \G\\H\ (Introduction, Definition 8.3). If G and //are written additively, then we                                                                               two such products can be proved equal by repeated use of the associative law. A

write G      ©H           in place of                    G X H.                                                                                                   necessary prerequisite for further study of groups and rings is a precise statement
                                                                                                                                                                  and proof of these conjectures and related ones.
                                                                                                                                                                      Given any sequence of elements of a semigroup G, a\,a 2           define inductively a                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .       .   |



                                                                                                                                                                  meaningful product of a u       a n (in this order) as follows. If n = 1, the only mean-
Theorem 1.5. Let R (~) be an equivalence relation on a monoid G such that ai ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                         a2
                                                                                                                                                                  ingful product is a\. If n > 1 then a meaningful product is defined to be any product
a/k/ bi     -b      2   //77/7fy      a^t          - a b for     2   2         all a i? bi e G.           Then the set G/R of all equivalence
                                                                                                                                                                  of the form (a v    a n)(a m +\       •                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                  a n ) where m < n and («]••• a m ) and (a m +i     a n ) are                                                                       •   •       •




clashes ofG under    R is a monoid under the binary operation defined by (a)(b) = ab,                                                                             meaningful products of m and n — m elements respectively. 2 Note that for each
 where x denotes the equivalence class of x e G // G is an [abelian] group, then so is G/R   .




                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                       To show that this definition is in fact well defined requires a stronger version of the
                                                                                                                                                                  Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction; see C. W. Burrill [56; p. 57].
     x
         In many books, however, the product o-r                                             is defined         to be 'V followed by t."
28                                                                                      CHAPTER                I        GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                     1.   SEMIGROUPS, MONOIDS AND GROUPS                                                        29



n > 3 there may be many meaningful products of a u        a n For each n e N* we                                                                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                             ,         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = aa   a(n factors). Note that we may have a m = a n with m 5* n (for example, in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -




single out a particular meaningful product by defining inductively the standard n                                                                                                                                                                     C, -1 =   = ).            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6


                                   n
product YL a i of ai,                                        .   .   .   ,   a n as follows:                                                                                                                                                                     ADDITIVE NOTATION. If the binary operation in G is written additively,
        t = 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      then we write na in place of a n Thus Oa = 0, \a = a, na = (n — \)a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 + a, etc.
                                                        1                                                                          n                                /n-1                   \

                                                    Y[ ai = fli;
                                                    i   =i
                                                                                        and for n > 1,                         U
                                                                                                                               i   =i
                                                                                                                                               a,   :
                                                                                                                                                            =   (
                                                                                                                                                                 \t = i
                                                                                                                                                                                     a,-

                                                                                                                                                                                           /

The fact that this definition defines for each n s N* a unique element of G (which is                                                                                                                                                                 Theorem 1.9. If G is a group [resp. semigroup monoid] and a £ G, then for all            ,



clearly a meaningful product) is a consequence of the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m, n £ Z [resp. N*, N]:
Introduction (Exercise 16).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (i)        a m a n = a m+n (additive notation: ma     + na = (m -f n)a);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (ii)       (a m ) n    = a mn (additive notation: n(ma) = mna).

Theorem 1.6. (Generalized Associative Law) IfG is a semigroup and ai,                                                                                                                                                   .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,   a n e G,          SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that (a n )~ = (a~ )« for all n e N and that            l               l



then any two meaningful products ofa u                                                                    .    .   .
                                                                                                                       ,   a n in this order are equal.                                                                                               a -n — (tf-i)n for a u n e    £ (j) s t rue for m > and « > since the product of a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      standard n product and a standard m product is a meaningful product equal to the
         PROOF. We use induction to show that for every n any meaningful product                                                                                                                                                                      standard (m + n) product by Theorem 1.6. For m < 0, and n <         replace a, m, n by
                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            —m,—n and use the preceding argument. The case m = or n = is trivial and
     a n is equal to the standard n product YL a* This is certainly true for n = 1,2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,

a\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the cases w > 0, n <         and m < 0, n > are handled by induction on m and re-
     •   •   •                                                                                                                             -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a?
                                            i = i

If n > 2, then by definition (ai- -a n ) = («r -a^Xa^+i- -a n ) for some m < n.                   •                                    •                                         •                                                                    spectively, (ii) is trivial if m = 0. The case when m >   and £ Z is proved by induc-                          a?


Therefore, by induction and associativity:                                                                                                                                                                                                            tion on m. Use this result to prove the case m <        and n £ Z.
                                                                                                                           m                   \ / n— m                              \

                                                                                                                           JI                                   II      fl   m+t )
                                                                                                                   (                                                                                                                                                                                                     EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 .       Give examples other than those in the text of semigroups and monoids that are
                             -(h*)((h -*>-) -((R*)(n ""')>•                                                                                                                                                                                                      not groups.
                                                                               /n-l               \                    n
                                                                         = ( ii^k =                                                                                                                                                                    2.        Let G be a group (written additively), S a nonempty set, and M(S,G) the set of
                                                                               \ =i t             /                t   =i                                                                                                                                        all functions                   f:S—+G. Define addition in M(S,G) as follows: (f-\-g):S—+G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is     given by sf— f(s)                + g(s) £ G. Prove that M(S,G)                          is   a group, which is abelian
         In view of Theorem 1.6                                                             we can and do write any meaningful product of                                                                                                                        if     G is.
au       .   .       .       ,    a n e G (G a semigroup) as aia 2                                    -    •
                                                                                                               -a n without parentheses or ambiguity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3. Is it true that a semigroup which has a                                          identity element and in which every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 element has a right inverse (see Proposition 1.3) is a group?

Corollary 1.7. (Generalized Commutative Law) IfG is a commutative semigroup and                                                                                                                                                                        4.        Write out a multiplication table for the group D*.
ai,    a n e G, then for any permutation ii,
         .   .       .       ,                    n of 1, 2,    n, aia 2  -a n =                                                       .   .   .        ,   i                                  .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -   •



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5.        Prove that the symmetric group on n letters, Sn has order n\.                     ,
a^aij            •       •    •
                                  ai n   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6.        Write out an addition table for Z2                          ©Z Z ©Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.   2               2   is   called the Klein four group.

             PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7. If p is prime, then the nonzero elements                                 ofZp form a group of order p — 1 under
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 multiplication.                   [///>?/.•   a ^       => (a,/?) = 1 ;use Introduction, Theorem 6.5.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Show that this statement is false if p is not prime.
Definition 1.8. Let G be a semigroup, a £ G and n £ N*. The element a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    £       G is defined
                                                                                        n                                                                                                                                                              8.        (a) The relation given by a ~ b     a — beZ is a congruence relation on the
to be the standard n product                                                    H
                                                                                i   =i
                                                                                             ai   with ai = a for 1                                         <   i   < n. IfG is a monoid, a is                                                                   additive group Q [see Theorem 1.5].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) The set Q/Z of equivalence classes is an infinite abelian group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _n is defined
defined to be the identity element e.IfGisa group, then for each n £ N*, a
to be (a
                                 _1 n
                                   )         £ G.                                                                                                                                                                                                      9.        Let p be a fixed prime. Let R p be the set of all those rational numbers whose de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nominator is relatively prime to p. Let Rp be the set of rationals whose de-
         The remarks preceding Theorem 1 .6 and Exercise 16 show that exponentiation is                                                                                                                                                                          nominator is a power of p (p\ i > 0). Prove that both R p and R p are abelian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ~l
well defined. By definition, then, a 1 == a, a 2 = aa, a 3 = (aa)a = aaa,                                                                                                                                  .   .   .    ,   an = an               a              groups under ordinary addition of rationals.
                                                                                                                                                            .                                                                                                                                ;




30                                                                 CHAPTER                 I           GROUPS                                                                                                      2.              HOMOMORPHISMS AND SUBGROUPS                                                                              31



                                                                                                                                                                               /: G —> //is a homomorphism, then f(eG ) =
                                                                    co
10.    Let p be a prime and let Z{p                                      )       be the following subset of the group Q/Z (see                                                                                                                                                         however, this is not true for mon-
       Pg. 27):                                                                                                                                                                oids (Exercise 1). Furthermore f(a~ l ) = f(a)~ l for all a £ G (Exercise 1).

                                  ZO°°) = {ajhe Q/Z a,beZ                                                  and     b = p { for some / > 0}
                                                                             \


                                                                                                                                                                                  EXAMPLE. The map / Z —* Zm given by x |—> * (that is, each integer is mapped
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :




       Show that Z(/7°°) is an infinite group under the addition operation of Q/Z.                                                                                             onto its equivalence class inZm ) is an epimorphism of additive groups, /is called the
                                                                                                                                                                               canonical epimorphism of Z onto                                                  Zm Similarly, the map g Q — Q/Z given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                          :     >

11.    The following conditions on a group G are equivalent: (i) G is abelian; (ii) {ab) 2                                                                                     r — r is also an epimorphism of additive groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                 |   >

       = a b2 for all a,b e G; (iii) (a^)" = a" **- for all a,b e G; (iv) (a&)» = a n bn for
                    2                                                            1                 1       1


                                           n =
         « s Z and all
       all                   e G; (v) {ab)     a n b n for three consecutive integers n and
                                                                                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. If A is an abelian group, then the map given by a\-+ a' is an auto-                                                         1

       all a,b s G.                   Show that (v) =» (i) is false if "three" is replaced by "two."
                                                                                                                                                                               morphism of A. The map given by a f— a 2 is an endomorphism of A.
12. If          G is a group, a,b s G and foZr = a for some r £ N, then b ab~ = a    1             r                                   i          i             rl
                                                                                                                                                                     for all
      yeN.                                                                                                                                                                             EXAMPLE. Let                        1       < w, k e N*. The map g :Zm ->Zm * given by                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    — kx is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >


                                                                                                                                                                               monomorphism.
13. If a            2   = e for all elements a of a group G, then G is abelian.
14. If          G is a finite group of even order, then G contains an element a ^ e such that                                                                                          EXAMPLE. Given                               groups                 G     and       //,    there          are       four   homomorphisms:
       a 1 = e.                                                                                                                                                                G^±GXH<^H, given by n(g) =                                                                   t 2 (/z)   = (e,h); in(g,h) = g; 7r2(g,/z) =                    /z.


15.    Let G be a nonempty finite set with an associative binary operation such that                                                                                           ti is     a monomorphism and 7r 7 is an epimorphism (J J = 1,2).
                   eGab = ac=$b = c and ba = ca =» b = c. Then G is a group.
       for all a,b,c
       Show that this conclusion may be false if G is infinite.
16.   Let tfi,tf 2 ... be a sequence of elements in a semigroup G. Then there exists a
                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                               Definition 2.2. Le/ f                G —> H &e a homomorphism of groups. The kernel off {de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :




       unique function \p   N* — G such that \p{\) = a u \p{2) = a\a \p{3) = {a^a^
                                                    :          >                                                                        2,                                     noted Ker f) is a e        {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                G f(a) = e s H IfA is a subset ofG, then f(A) = b e H b = f(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          } .                                                      {                |




       and for n > 1, \p{n -f- 1) = (^(«))« n+ Note that \p{n) is precisely the standard   i.                                                                                  for some a £          A    }   is the image of A. f(G) is called the image of f                         and denoted Im f. If B is
                                      n                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                               a subset ofH, f (B) = {a £                                    G       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f(a) £ B} is the inverse image ofB.
      n product JJ a { [Hint: Applying the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduc-
                                          .


                 i = i

      tion with a = a u S = G and fn G —> G given by x |— > *tf n+2 yields a function
                                                                                 :




       <p   :   N — G. Let>               i/'   = <^0, where                         :   N* — N is given by
                                                                                                       >                      —
                                                                                                                              |   >     —        1 .]                          Theorem 2.3. Let f                      :   G — H be a homomorphism of groups. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >



                                                                                                                                                                                       (i)   f is a monomorphism if and only if Ker f       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e}                                   =
                                                                                                                                                                                     (ii)    f is an isomorphism if and only if there is a homomorphism f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :   H — G such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    >


2.    HOMOMORPHISMS AND SUBGROUPS                                                                                                                                              that ff" 1     = 1 H andf'H = 1 G                             .




      Essential to the study of any class of algebraic objects are the functions that pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                  PROOF, (i) If / is a monomorphism and a e Ker /, then f{a) = eH = f(e)                                                                                     9

serve the given algebraic structure in the following sense.
                                                                                                                                                                               whence a = e and Ker /=     e\ If Ker /=    e\ and /(a) = f{b), then eH = f{a)f{bY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l


                                                                                                                                                                               = f(a) f{b~ ) = f{ab~ ) so that ab' e Ker /. Therefore, ab' = e (that is, a = b) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                     l                     l                                1                                          1



                                                                                                                                                                               /is a monomorphism.
Definition 2.1. Let                       G and H be semigroups. A function f G — H                                     :     >       is a   homomorphism                            (ii)    If /is an isomorphism, then by (13) of Introduction, Section 3 there is a map
provided                                                                                                                                                                       of sets /_1       :     > H— G
                                                                                                                                                                                                           such that -1     1<? and //
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 / /=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is easily seen to be a               =        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                                                                                               homomorphism. The converse is an immediate consequence of (13) of Introduction,
                                                        f(ab) = f(a)f(b)                           for all         a,b £ G.
                                                                                                                                                                               Section 3 and Definition 2.1.

Iff is inject we as a map of sets, f is said to be a monomorphism. Iffis surjective, f is
called an epimorphism. Iffis bijective, f is called an isomorphism. In this case                                                              G and H                              Let G be a semigroup and Ha. nonempty subset of G. If for every a,b e //we have
are said to be isomorphic {written                                   G = H). A homomorphism f                                     :   G — G s called an
                                                                                                                                             >          /
                                                                                                                                                                               ab s H, we say that // is closed under the product in G. This amounts to saying that
endomorphism ofG and an isomorphism f                                        G — G is called an automorphism ofG.
                                                                                               :               >
                                                                                                                                                                               the binary operation on G, when restricted to H, is in fact a binary operation on H.



      If    / G — H and g
                :             >      H^— K are homomorphisms of semigroups, is easy to see
                                                :          >                                                                                 it

that gf: G               — K is also a homomorphism. Likewise the composition of monomor-
                                  >                                                                                                                                            Definition 2.4. Let G be a group and H a nonempty subset that is closed under the
phismsis a monomorphism; similarly for epimorphisms, isomorphisms and auto-                                                                                                                   H is itself a group under the product in G, then H is said to be a sub-
                                                                                                                                                                               product in G. If
morphisms. If G and                                 H
                       are groups with identities eG and eH respectively and                                                                                                   group ofG. This is denoted by H < G.
          a                                                                                                                                       G                                                a                    .




32                                                  CHAPTER                      I   GROUPS                                                                                               2.       HOMOMORPHISMS AND SUBGROUPS                                                                                   33



     Two examples of subgroups of a group G are G itself and the trivial subgroup (e)                                                                 Theorem 2.8. IfG is a group and X is a nonempty subset ofG, then the subgroup (X)
consisting only of the identity element.                                     A subgroup H such that H 9^ G, H 9^ (e) is                               generated by X consists ofall finite products ai ni a 2 n2                               •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a t nt (ai £   X ni £ Z). In particular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;


called a proper subgroup.                                                                                                                             for every a £ G, (a) =                   {
                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                               n £ Z}


     EXAMPLE. The set of all multiples of some fixed integer n is a subgroup of Z,                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Show that the set H of all such products is a subgroup
which is isomorphic to Z (Exercise 7).                                                                                                                of G that contains                  X and is contained in every subgroup containing X. Therefore
                                                                                                                                                      H < (X) < H.                    m
   EXAMPLE. In Sn the group of all permutations of 1,2, ...,«}, the set of all
                                               ,                                                          {


permutations that leave n fixed forms a subgroup isomorphic to S n _i (Exercise 8).                                                                         EXAMPLES. The additive group Z is an infinite cyclic group with generator 1,
                                                                                                                                                      since   by Definition 1.8 (additive notation), ml = m for all meZ. Of course the
     EXAMPLE. InZ = {0,1,2,3,4,5}          6                         ,       both {0,3) and {0,2,4} are subgroups under                               "powers" of the generating element need not all be distinct as they are in Z. The
addition. If p is prime, (Zp ,+) has no proper subgroups.                                                                                             trivial subgroup (e) of any group is cyclic; the multiplicative subgroup (/) in C is
                                                                                                                                                      cyclic of order 4 and for each m the additive group Zm is cyclic of order m with
     EXAMPLE. If /: G —> H is a homomorphism of groups, then Ker /is a sub-                                                                           generator 1 £ Zm In Section 3 we shall prove that every cyclic subgroup is isomorphic
                                                                                                                                                                                  .



group of G. If A is a subgroup of G, f(A) is a subgroup of H\ in particular Im /is a                                                                  either to       Z orZm for some m. Also, see Exercise 12.
subgroup of H. If B is a subgroup of //, f~ l (B) is a subgroup of G (Exercise 9).


     EXAMPLE. If G is a group, then the set Aut G of all automorphisms of G is a
                                                                                                                                                            If { Hi   I
                                                                                                                                                                          / £   /} is a family of subgroups of a group G, then                                            UH        {   is not a   subgroup

group, with composition of functions as binary operation (Exercise 15).                                                                               of G in general. The subgroup ((J { ) generated by the set        H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (J Hi is called the sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                     UI                          hi
                                                                                                                                                      group generated by the groups {Hi i e 1} If    and K are subgroups, the subgroup
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .    H
     By Theorem 1 .2 the identity element of any subgroup //is the identity element of                                                                (H U K) generated by //and K is called the join of and and is denoted                            H               K                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V K
G and the inverse of a e H is the inverse cr of a in G.                              l
                                                                                                                                                      (additive notation:                 H + K).

Theorem 2.5. Let H be a nonempty subset of a group G. Then H is a subgroup of
if and only if ab
                              -1
                                      e   H for all a,b e H.                                                                                                                                                        EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                       1.   If/: G —» //is a homomorphism of groups, then f(eG ) = eH and f{a~ l ) = f{a)' 1
                                                                                                    _1
     PROOF. (<=) There exists a e //and hence e =            Thus for any b e //, Zr         tf<2        e //.
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                            for all a £ G. Show by example that the first conclusion may be false if G,                                                                     H are
=       e //. If a ,6 e //, then £ H and hence #6 = a(b~ )~ e H. The product in
                                                                                                          l       l
                                                                                                                                                  H         monoids that are not groups.
is associative since G is a group. Therefore      is a (sub)group. The converse is       H
trivial.                                                                                                                                               2.   A group G is abelian if and only if the map G — G given by x |— x~ is an auto-             >                                 >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l


                                                                                                                                                            morphism.

                                                                                                                                                            Let Q 8 be the group (under ordinary matrix multiplication) generated by the com-
Corollary 2.6. If G is a group and Hi                            {       |
                                                                             i   e 1} is a nonempty family of subgroups, then
                                                                                                                                                       3.

   Hi is a subgroup of G.                                                                                                                                                                 =
ui
                                                                                                                                                            plex matrices A
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^_ ^          ^ and B = ^                                   where / 2 = -1. Show that Q 8

                                                                                                                                                            isa nonabelian group of order 8. Q s is called the quaternion group. [Hint:
     PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                       Observe that BA = ^ 35, whence every element of Qs is of the form AW. Note

                                                                                                                                                            also that /i 4            = B = /, where / =
                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^   is the identity element of                          Q   s .]


Definition 2.7. Let               G be a group andX a subset ofG. Let Hi e I be the family of                 {       |
                                                                                                                          i       }



all subgroups of              G which contain X. Then O Hi is called the subgroup of G generated                                                       4.   LetH be the group (under matrix multiplication) of real matrices generated by
                                                                                                                                                            C=            anC ^ =           S ^ ow ^ at     a nona belian group of order 8
by the set X and denoted (X)'.                                                                                                                                         0)          (l 0)'
                                                                                                                                                                                               *



                                                                                                                                                            which is not isomorphic to the quaternion group of Exercise 3, but is isomorphic
   The elements of X are the generators of the subgroup (X), which may also be                                                                              to the group Z> 4 *.
generated by other subsets (that is, we may have (X) = (Y) with X 5^ Y). If
X= u  {      a n we write (a u
              .   .   .
                          ,   }
                                  a n ) in place of (X). If G = {a u
                                  ,                  .   .   .
                                                                 ,   a n ), to £ G),                                          .       .   .
                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                       5.   Let S be a nonempty subset of a group G and define a relation on G by a                                                                         ~b   if
G is said to be finitely generated. If a e G, the subgroup (a) is called the cyclic (sub-                                                                   and only if ab' 1 e S. Show that                                —   is   an equivalence relation if and only if S is a
group generated by a.                                                                                                                                       subgroup of G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,




34                                                          CHAPTER                            I        GROUPS                                                                                                                                                     3.        CYCLIC GROUPS                                                          35



 6.   A nonempty finite subset of a group is a subgroup if and only if                                                                        it is closed               under
                                                                                                                                                                                      3.     CYCLIC GROUPS
      the product in G.
                                                                                                                                                                                             The structure of cyclic groups is relatively simple. We shall completely char-
 1. If n is a fixed integer, then                           {
                                                                 kn      \
                                                                                 k e Z) (Z Z is an additive subgroup of Z, which                                                      acterize all cyclic groups (up to isomorphism).
      is   isomorphic to Z.

 8.   The set {a eSn                   <r(n)   = n) is a subgroup of Sn which is isomorphic to S„_i.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 3.1. Every subgroup H of the additive group Z is cyclic. Either H = (0) or
                               \




 9.   Let /      :   G —> H be a homomorphism of groups, A a subgroup of G, and B a sub-                                                                                              H = (m), where m is the least positive integer in H. //H^ (0), then H is infinite.
      group of H.
      (a)   Ker / and f~\B) are subgroups of G.                                                                                                                                           PROOF. Either H = (0) or H contains a least positive integer m. Clearly
      (b) f(A) is a subgroup of //.                                                                                                                                                   (m) =  km k e Zj (Z H. Conversely if h e H, then h = qm + r with q, r s Z and
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I             I




                                                                                                                                                                                        < r < m (division algorithm). Since r = h — qm e H the minimality of m implies
10. List all subgroups of                      Z 0Z Is Z ©Z isomorphic to Z ?
                                                   2                2.                 2                2                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                      r =   and h = qm. Hence H d (m). If H ^ (0), it is clear that H = (m) is in-
                                                                                                                                                                                      finite.
11. If  G is a group, then C = a e G ax = xa for all x e G  {                     |
                                                                                                                            }   is   an abelian subgroup
      of G. C is called the center of G.

12.   The group £> 4 * is not cyclic, but can be generated by two elements. The same is                                                                                               Theorem 3.2. Every infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to the additive group Z and
      true of S n (nontrivial). What is the minimal number of generators of the additive                                                                                              every finite cyclic group of order ir is isomorphic to the additive group Z m                                                                        .




      group Z          © Z?
                                                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. If G = (a) is a cyclic group then the map a Z —> G given by k (— a k
         G = (a) is a cyclic group and H is any group, then every homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :                     >
13. If
                                                                                                                                                                                      is an epimorphism by Theorems 1.9 and 2.8. If Ker a = 0, then Z = G by Theorem
      /: G —» H is completely determined by the element f(a) s H.
                                                                                                                                                                                      2.3(i). Otherwise Ker a is a nontrivial subgroup of Z (Exercise 2.9) and hence


14.   The following cyclic subgroups are all isomorphic: the multiplicative group (/) in                                                                                              Ker a = (m), where m is the least positive integer such that a m = e (Theorem 3.1).
                                                                                                                                                                                      For all r, s s Z,
      C, the additive group                    Z and the subgroup
                                                       4                                                                                      of 5 4      .

                                                                                                                  ^     ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r   = a   ,     ^ a               r- s      = e       ^     r   — s e Ker a = (m)
15.   Let G be a group and Aut G the set of all automorphisms of G.                                                                                                                                                                            <=>   /77       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (r    — s)      <=>   r   = s in Z^
        (a) Aut G is a group with composition of functions as binary operation. [Hint:
                                                                                                                                                                                      (where k is the congruence class of k s Z). Therefore tire map (3 :Zm —> G given by
      \   G e Aut G is an identity; inverses exist by Theorem 2.3.]                                                                                                                   k |—>               a well-defined epimorphism. Since
           (b)       Aut   Z ^Z         2   and Aut Z6                                ^Z           2;    Aut Z8   ^Z ©Z 2                2;   Aut Zv                ^Z        p _!
                                                                                                                                                                                                     is



      (p prime).                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0(£) = e            ^>                 fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *   = e = a         ^ k=                         in   Zm9
           (c)       What is Aut Zn for arbitrary n e N*?
                                                                                                                                                                                        is a    monomorphism (Theorem 2.3(i)), and hence an isomorphismZw                                                                                = G.
16.   For each prime p the additive subgroup Z(/?°°) qf Q/Z (Exercise 1.10) is generated
      by the set {TJp~n n e N*}.   \




                                                                                                                                                                                      Definition 3.3. Let    be a group and a s G.    G                                                              order o/a is the order of the cyclic
17.   Let G be an abelian group and let H,K be subgroups of G. Show that the join                                                                                                     subgroup (a) and is denoted |a|.
      H          #
         V is the set 06 a e H, b e K) Extend this result to any finite number of
                                        {      |
                                                                                           .




      subgroups of G.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 3.4. Let G be a group and a s G. //a /z^s infinite order, then
18. (a)   Let G be a group and Hi                               f            \
                                                                                 i e   1}          a family of subgroups. State and prove a
      condition that will imply that                                  UH               {   is a subgroup, that is, that {J                       Hi = (U                     H { ).           (i)        a k = e // art*/ 6>A2/> ifk = 0;
                                                                                                                                                                                              (ii)       //ze elements                a k (k s Z) are all distinct.
      (b) Give an example of a group G and a family of subgroups {Hi                                                                                  \
                                                                                                                                                              i   e 1}       such
      that IJ Hi ^ (U Hi).                                                                                                                                                            If'a    to yz/7/7e o/Yfer m > 0, //ze/?
             iel              til

                                                                                                                                                                                            (iii)        m    is       the least positive integer such that a m = e;
19. (a)     The set of all subgroups of a group G, partially ordered by set theoretic in-                                                                                                    (iv)        a k = e // and only if                      m k;          \




      clusion, forms a complete lattice (Introduction, Exercises 7.1                                                                      and 7.2) in which                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                              = a // and only if r = s {mod m);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                              (v) a
      the g.l.b. of [Hi |is/}                          is   fl Hi and the l.u.b. is (U Hi).                                                                                                  (vi) (a) consists of the distinct elements a,a 2 ,                                                  .   .   .       a m_1 ,a m = e;
                                                            iel                                                   iel                                                                                                                                                                                        ,



      (b) Exhibit the lattice of subgroups of the groups S3, A*,                                                                     Z Z 6,    27 ,   and Z36            .
                                                                                                                                                                                            (vii)    for each k such that k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m, |a          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = m/k.
                                                                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                .




36                                           CHAPTER    I    GROUPS                                                                                                                          4.          COSETS AND COUNTING                                                                          37



      SKETCH OF PROOF, (i)-(vi) are immediate consequences of the proof of                                                       5.   Let G be the multiplicative group of all nonsingular                                                                     2X2 matrices with rational
Theorem 3.2. (vii) ( a k ) mlk = a m = e and (a k) r ^ e for all                       < r < m/k since other-
wise c^ r = e with kr < k(m/k) =                   m contradicting       (iii).        Therefore,      \a
                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                    = m/k
                                                                                                                                      entries. Show that a =
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^                 ^ has order 4 and b = ^ ^                                       has order 3,

by (iii).                                                                                                                             but ab has infinite order. Conversely, show that the additive group                                                                        Z © Z con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                                                      tains      nonzero elements a,b of infinite order such that a                                                                    + b has finite order.
                                                                                                                              6.      If    G is a cyclic group of order n and k                                                            n, then         G has exactly one subgroup of
Theorem 3.5. Every homomorphic image and every subgroup of a cyclic group G is                                                                                                                                                      \




                                                                                                                                      order k.
cyclic. In particular, ifH is a nontrivial subgroup ofG = (a) and m is the least positive
                     m
integer such that a e H, then H = (a ).
                                          m
                                                                                                                              7.        Let p be prime and                       H a subgroup of Z(/?                                           ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )   (Exercise 1.10).
                                                                                                                                            Every element of Z(/?°°) has finite order p n for some n > 0.
                                                                                                                                           (a)
   SKETCH OF PROOF. If f\G—>K is a homomorphism of groups, then                                                                         (b) If at least one element of      has order p k and no el emen t of       H
                                                                                                                                                                                                               has order                                                          H
Im / = (f(a)). To prove the second statement simply translate the proof of Theorem                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                      greater than p then,                   H
                                                                                                                                                              is the cyclic subgroup generated by l/p
                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                         whence //= Zpk                                                     ,                             .




3.1 into multiplicative notation (that is, replace every / e                   Z by a throughout). This
                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                        (c) If there is no upper bound on the orders of elements of //, then
proof works even if G is finite.                                                                                                      H =Z(p°°); [see Exercise 2.16].
                                                                                                                                           (d)   The only proper subgroups of Z(p°°)                                                                         are the   finite   cyclic   groups
      Recall that two distinct elements in a group may generate the same cyclic sub-                                                  Cn = (T/p n ) (n = 1,2,       Furthermore, (0) = C <    < C2 < C3 <
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .   .).                                                           d                      •   •   •




group.                                                                                                                                  (e) Let xi,x 2 ... be elements of an abelian group G such that
                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          = /?,
                                                                                                                                      px 2 = x u pxz = x 2     pxn+ = x n
                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                             .  The subgroup generated by the
                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,             i        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .       .   .




                                                                                                                                      Xi (i   > 1) is isomorphic toZ(/?°°). [Hint: Verify that the map induced by a\ H \/p                                                                                i



Theorem 3.6. Let G = (a) be a cyclic group. If G is infinite, then                             sl
                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                 and a are the                        is   a well-defined isomorphism.]
only generators ofG.IfG is finite of order m, then a
                                                                    k
                                                                        is a generator          of G if and only
if (Km)     = 1.                                                                                                             8.       A group that has only a finite number of subgroups must be finite.
                                                                                                                             9. If      G is an abelian group, then the set T of all elements of G with finite order is a
    SKETCH OF PROOF. It suffices to assume either that G = Z, in which case                                                           subgroup of G. [Compare Exercise 5.]
the conclusion is easy to prove, or that G = Zm If (k,m) = 1, there are c,d e Z such
                                                                .




that ck     + dm =          1 ;   use this fact to show that k generates      Zm If (k,m) = r > 1, show
                                                                                   .                                        10.       An infinite group is cyclic if and only if it is isomorphic to each of its proper subgroups.
that for n    = m/r < m, nk = nk =                  and hence k cannot generate Z,„.

      A naive hope might be that the techniques used above could be extended to
groups with two generators and eventually to all finitely generated groups, and thus
provide a description of the structure of such groups. Unfortunately, however, even
                                                                                                                            4.     COSETS AND COUNTING
groups with only two generators may have a very complex structure. (They need not
be abelian for one thing; see Exercises 2.3 and 2.4.) Eventually we shall be able to                                               In this section we obtain the first significant theorems relating the structure of a
characterize all finitely generated abelian groups, but even this will require a great                                      finite group          G with the number theoretic properties of its order \G\. We begin by ex-
deal more machinery.                                                                                                        tending the concept of congruence modulo m in the group Z. By definition a = b
                                                                                                                            (mod m) if and only if m a — b, that is, if and only if a — b is an element of the
                                                                                                                                                                                 \




                                                                                                                            subgroup (m) = [mk k sZ*}. More generally (and in multiplicative notation)
                                                                                                                                                                 \




                                                EXERCISES                                                                   we have
 1.   Let a,b be elements of group G.                       Show that   \a\    =               \ab\   = \ba\, and
      \a\ = \cac
                 x
                   for all c e G.
                        \




                                                                                                                            Definition 4.1. Let H be a subgroup of a group G anda,b e G. a is right congruent to
 2.   Let G be an abelian group containing elements a and b of orders m and n re-
                                                                                                                            b modulo H, denoted a = r b (mod H) //ab -1 e H. a is left congruent to b modulo H,
      spectively. Show that G contains an element whose order is the least common
                                                                                                                            denoted a =i b (mod H), // _1 b e H.
      multiple of       m and n. [Hint: first try the case when (m,ri) = 1.]
      Let G be an abelian group of order pq, with (/?,<?) =              1 .   Assume there exist a,b e G
 3.
                            = p, \b\ = q and show that G is cyclic.
                                                                                                                                   If      G is abelian, then right and left congruence modulo H coincide (since ab~ e H                                                                  l

      such that \a\
                                                                                                                            <=> (ab~ l )~ l e      H and (ab~ )~ = bar = a~ b). There also exist nonabelian groups G
                                                                                                                                                                         l               l                     1        l



 4. If /:    G — //is a homomorphism, a e G, and f(a) has finite order in H, then \a\ is                                    and subgroups //such that right and left congruence coincide (Section 5), but this is
      infinite or   |
                        f(a)\ divides \a\.                                                                                  not true in general.
                                                                                                                           |




 38                                      CHAPTER          I       GROUPS                                                                                                                4.       COSETS AND COUNTING                                                                                     39


 Theorem 4.2. Let H be a subgroup of a group G.                                                                                                A complete set of right coset representatives of a subgroup H in a group G is a
           (i)    Right [resp. left] congruence modulo            H         is an    equivalence relation on G.
                                                                                                                               set {ai} consisting of precisely one element from each right coset of                                                             H in G. Clearly
                                                                                                                               the set                a           has cardinality [G       Note that such a set contains exactly one element
                                                                                                                                                                                                     //].
                  The equivalence class of a e G under right [resp. left] congruence modulo H is
                                                                                                                                                          t }                                :
                                                                                                                                                  {
           (ii)

 the set Ha =        {ha|heH) [resp. aH = {ah|heH}].
                                                                                                                               of          H since H                = He is itself a right coset. Analogous statements apply to left cosets.
          (iii) |Ha| = |H| = |aH| for all a e G.




   The set Ha is called a right coset of //in G and aH is called a left coset of //in G.                                       Theorem 4.5. //K,H,G are groups with K < H < G, then [G K] = [G H][H                                                      :                    :                 :       K].
In general it is not the case that a right coset is also a left coset (Exercise 2).                                            // any two of these indices are finite, then so is the third.

          PROOF OF 4.2. We writer = bfora = 6 (mod //) and prove the theorem for
                                                                       r                                                                   PROOF. By Corollary 4.3 G = (J Ha with a £ G, |/| = [G H] and the cosets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {                {                          :



right congruence and right cosets. Analogous arguments apply to left congruence.
                                                                                                                                                                                         H = U Kbj with bj H,
                                                                                                                               Hai mutually disjoint (that is, Hai = Haj <=> / = j). Similarly                                                                                                  £
            (i)   Let a,b,c e G. Then a = « since                          = e e H; hence .= is reflexive. = is
clearly symmetric (a = b=> ab~ l e            H
                                      {ab~ l )~ l z   bcr 1 e H=^ b = a). FinallyH                                               = [H K] and the cosets Kbj are mutually disjoint. Therefore G = U Hai =
                                                                                                                               \J\                    :




a = b and & = c imply aZt 1 e // and bc~ l s //. Thus <zc -1 = (ab~ l )(bc~ l ) e // and                                              Kbj)ai =
                         = is transitive. Therefore, right congruence modulo H is an
                                                                                                                               U (U            U J Kbjai. It suffices to show that the cosets Kbjai are mutually
a = c; hence                                                                                                                   ieljeJ

equivalence relation.                                                                                                                                                             K] = |/ X J\, whence [G K]
                                                                                                                               disjoint. For then by Corollary 4.3. we must have [G                                                   :                                                             :




        The equivalence class of a s G under right congruence is x e G * = #
          (ii)
                                                                                                                               = \I X J\ = \l\\J\ = [G H][H K]. If Kb m = Kb a then b jai = kb a (k e K).
                                                                                                                                                                                    :                :                                r       ti                                  r   t



                                                                                                                               Since b ;b ,k £ H we have Hai = Hb^ai = Hkb a = Ha hence / = / and bj = kb
                                                                                                           (   |




 = {x's G x^" e //} = {x e G x^- = h e H\ = {x e G x = ha; h e H]
                     |
                          1
                                                  |
                                                      1
                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                                  }       r                                                              r    t                t ;                                                       r.


 = {ha\heH} = Ha.                                                                                                              Thus Kbj = Kkb = Kb and j = r. Therefore, the cosets Kbjai are mutually disjoint.
                                                                                                                                                                         r      r


   (iii) The map Ha — // given by ha |—
                                    >                 > /?        is       easily seen to be a bijection.                      The last statement of the theorem is obvious.



                                                                                                                               Corollary 4.6. {Lagrange). IfH is a subgroup of a group G, then \G\ = [G                                                                                       H]|H|.
Corollary 4.3. Let            H be a subgroup of a group G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :




                                                                                                                               In particular ifG is finite, the order |a| of a e                                     G divides |G|.
           (i) G is the union of the right [resp. left] cosets ofH in G.
          (ii) Two right [resp. left] cosets ofH in G are either disjoint or equal.                                                        PROOF. Apply the theorem with K = (e) for the first statement. The second is a
      (iii)    For all a,b £ G, Ha = Hb <=> ab" £ H and aH = bH
                                                      1
                                                                           a^b £ H.                                            special case of the first with                               H = (a).
          (iv) If (Ris the set of distinct right cosets ofH in G and £   the set of distinct left
                                                                                            is

cosets       ofH in G, then |(R| = |£|.                                                                                                    A number of proofs in the theory of (finite) groups rely on various "counting"
                                                                                                                               techniques, some of which we now introduce. If G is a group and H,K are subsets of
    PROOF, (i)-(iii) are immediate consequences of the theorem and statements                                                  G, we denote by                           HK the set ab a e H, b e K] a right or left coset of a subgroup is a
                                                                                                                                                                                        {        \                   ;


                                                 — <£ given by Ha |-> cr H is a
(19)—(21) of Introduction, Section 4. (iv) The map (R                                 >
                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                               special case. If H,K are subgroups,                         HK may not be a subgroup (Exercise 7).
bijection since Ha = Hb ^ ab' e H ^ (a' )'^ e H <=> a~ H = b~ H.
                                          1                   1              1              l              l




   ADDITIVE NOTATION. If                      H
                                  is a subgroup of an additive group, then right                                               Theorem 4.7. Let H and K be finite subgroups of a group G. Then |HK| =
congruence modulo His defined by: a = r b (mod H) <=> a — b e H. The equivalence                                               |H||K|/|H                           K|.
class of a e         G is the right coset H -f a = {h + a\ h e H); similarly for left congru-
ence and left cosets.                                                                                                             SKETCH OF PROOF. C =             D K is a subgroup of K of index n =   H
                                                                                                                               \K\/\H D K\ and Kis the disjoint union of right cosets Ck 1 U Ck 2 U U Ck n for                                                    •   •   •




                                                                                                                               some ki £ K. Since HC = H, this implies that HK is the disjoint union Hki U Hk 2 U
Definition 4.4. Let           H be a subgroup of a group G. The index of H in G, denoted                                       •   •   •       U Hk n Therefore, \HK\ = \H\-n = \H\\K\/\H D K\.
                                                                                                                                                              .                                                                                      m
[G    :   H], is the cardinal number of the set of distinct right [resp. left] cosets ofHinG.


                                   H] does not depend on whether right or left
      In view of Corollary 4.3 (iv), [G       :
                                                                                                                               Proposition 4.8. IfH and K are subgroups of a group G, then [H:H (1 K]<
cosets are used in the definition. Our principal interest is in the case when [G
                                                                             H] is                                     :
                                                                                                                               [G K]. // [G K] is finite, then [H H D K] = [G K] if and only if G = KH.
                                                                                                                                           :                         :                                       :                            :




finite, which can occur even when G and H are infinite groups (for example,

[Z :(m)] = m by Introduction, Theorem 6.8(i)). Note that if H = (e) then Ha = {a}                      9
                                                                                                                                           SKETCH OF PROOF. Let A be the set of all right cosets of H fl K in H and B
for every a e G and [G H] = \G\.:                                                                                                                           K in G. The map
                                                                                                                               the set of all right cosets of                      A — B given by (H D K)h h» Kh         <p   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;




40                                                             CHAPTER          I   GROUPS                                                                                      5.       NORMALITY, QUOTIENT GROUPS, AND HOMOMORPHISMS                                                                      41



(heH) is well defined since (H D K)h' = (H f) K)h implies h'h~ s H f) K d K                                                    l
                                                                                                                                                              10.      Let H,K,N be subgroups of a group G such that                                    H < K, H                 f)        N= K       f)   N,
and hence Kti = A7z. Show that ^ is injective. Then [H H f) K] = \A\ < \B\                                         :
                                                                                                                                                                       and HN = KN. Show that H = K.
= [G        :      K]. If [G         :   K] is finite, then show that [H                         :   H   f)   K] = [G   :   AT] if   and only if <p
                                                                                                                                                              1 1 .    Let G be a group of order 2n; then G contains an element of order 2. If n is odd
is   surjective and that                     <p   is   surjective if and only if                         G = KH. Note that for h s H,
                                                                                                                                                                       and G abelian, there is only one element of order 2.
k e K, Kkh = #/z since (A:^)^- 1 = k e K.                                           m
                                                                                                                                                              12. If          H and # are subgroups of a group G, then [// V # H] > [K H                                :                    :        f)   K}.


                                                                                                                                                              13. If p         > q are primes, a group of order                  has at most one subgroup of order p.
Proposition 4.9. Let H am/ K £e subgroups of finite index of a group G. Then
[G H PI K] is finite and [G H D K] < [G H][G K]. Furthermore, [G H fl K]
      :                                                    :                            :                :                                :
                                                                                                                                                                       [Hint: Suppose H,K are distinct subgroups of order p. Show                                            H    fl       K = (e); use
                                                                                                                                                                       Exercise 12 to get a contradiction.]
= [G H][G K] if and only ifG = HK.
               :               :




                                                                                                                                                              14.      Let G be a group and a,b e G such that (i) \a\ = 4 = \b\                            (ii) a = b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (iii) ba = a b ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            z


      PROOF.                   Exercise; use Theorem 4.5 and Proposition 4.8.                                                                                           = a~ b\ (iv) a^b\
                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (v)   G = <a,6). Show that                 |G| =  8  and  G ^ (? 8 (See               .



                                                                                                                                                                       Exercise 2.3; observe that the generators A,B of Q s also satisfy (i)-(v).)



                                                                    EXERCISES
 1.       Let G be a group and {H                               |
                                                                    /   s /}   a family of subgroups. Then for any a s G,                                     5.      NORMALITY, QUOTIENT GROUPS, AND HOMOMORPHISMS
          (f| Hda = f| Hia                    .

                                                                                                                                                                      We shall study those subgroups N of a group G such that left and right con-
                                                                                                                                                              gruence modulo                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                  coincide. Such subgroups play an important role in determining
 2.       (a)    H be the cyclic subgroup (of order 2) of 5 generated by
                       Let                                                                                    3                                               both the structure of a group G and the nature of homomorphisms with domain G.

          Then no    coset of //(except H itself)
                              left                also a right coset. There exists a eS is                                                                s

          such that aH H //a = {a}.
                                                                                                                                      2       3\              Theorem 5.1. //N is a subgroup of a group G, then the following conditions are
                                                                                                                             (1
                                                                                                                               2      3       1 /'            equivalent.
          every left coset of K is also a right coset of K.
                                                                                                                                                                       (i)    Left and right congruence modulo               N coincide (that                   is,   define the same equiva-
 3.       The following conditions on a finite group G are equivalent.                                                                                        lence relation on G);
           (i)          \G\ is prime.                                                                                                                                 (ii)    every left coset ofN in              G is a right coset ofN in G;
          (ii)  G 5* (e) and G has no proper subgroups.                                                                                                               (iii)   aN = Na for all a £ G;
          (iii) G = ZP for some prime p.                                                                                                                              (iv) for all a e G,           aNa" 1       C N, where aNa-1 =       {   ana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n e N}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |




          (Euler-Fermat) Let a be an integer and p a prime such that p)(a. Then                                                                       = 1              (v) for all a e G, aNa^               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = N.
 4.

          (mod p). [Hint: Consider a eZp and the multiplicative group of nonzero elements
          of Zp see Exercise 1.7.] It follows that a p = a (mod p) for any integer a.
                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                      PROOF, (i)                  (iii)   Two equivalence relations R and 5 are identical if and only if
                                                                                                                                                              the equivalence class of each element under R is equal to its equivalence class under
 5.       Prove that there are only two distinct groups of order 4 (up to isomorphism),                                                                       S. In this case the equivalence classes are the left and right cosets respectively of N.
          namely Z4 and 2       2         Z 0Z
                                  [Hint: By Lagrange's Theorem 4.6 a group of order 4
                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                              (ii) => (iii)         If   aN = Nb for some b e G, then a e Nb fl Na, which implies Nb = Na
          that          is   not cyclic must consist of an identity and three elements of order 2.]                                                           since two right cosets are either disjoint or equal,                            (iii) ==> (iv)            is trivial, (iv) => (v)

 6.       Let H,K be subgroups of a group G. Then //# is a subgroup of G if and only if                                                                       We have aNa' C N. Since (iv) also holds for a~ e G, a~ Na C N Therefore for
                                                                                                                                                                                          1                                           l                         l




          HK = KH.                                                                                                                                            every n e N, n = a(ar l na)a~ l e aAfa -1 and jV                 C aNa'          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   (v) => (ii) is immediate.


 7.       Let G be a group of order p km, with p prime and (p,m) = 1. Let be a subgroup                                       H
          of order p k and K sl subgroup of order p d with    < d < k and KpL H. Show        ,



                       HK                                                                                                                                     Definition 5.2. A subgroup N of a group G w/z/c/z satisfies the equivalent conditions
          that                is   not a subgroup of G.
                                                                                                                                                              of Theorem 5.1 is said to be normal in G (or a normal subgroup ofG); we write N < G
 8. If          H and if are subgroups of finite index of a group G such that [G H] and                                                       :
                                                                                                                                                              //N is normal in G.
          [G       :         are relatively prime, then G = HK.

 9. If //,Zf and                     N are subgroups of a group G such that H < N, then //K                                                          fl   N      In view of Theorem 5.1 we may omit the subscripts "r" and                                                        when denoting
          = H(K D AO.                                                                                                                                         congruence modulo a normal subgroup.
42                                                    CHAPTER             I   GROUPS                                                                              5.      NORMALITY, QUOTIENT GROUPS, AND HOMOMORPHISMS                                       43



       EXAMPLES. Every subgroup of an abelian group is trivially normal. The sub-                                                                 precisely the coset of (m) in   Z which contains k; that is, as sets,Zm = Z/(m). Theo-
                                                                                                                                                  rems      1.5   and 5.4 show that the group operations coincide, whence Zm = Z/(m)
group       H generated by                                )   ^ ^ n ° rmal Exercise 4 2 More generally any
                                      Q ^             1
                                                                                        (                    -
                                                                                                                 )-
                                                                                                                                                  as groups.
subgroup A" of index 2 in a group G is normal (Exercise 1). The intersection of any                                                                       We now explore the relationships between normal subgroups, quotient groups,
family of normal subgroups is a normal subgroup (Exercise 2).                                                                                     and homomorphisms.


      G is a group with subgroups TV and M such that N <\ M and M <\ G, it does
       If
not follow that N <\ G (Exercise 10). However, it is easy to see that if TV is normal in                                                         Theorem 5.5. If /: G —» H is a homomorphism of groups, then the kernel off is a
G, then A" is normal in every subgroup of G containing N.                                                                                        normal subgroup ofG. Conversely, //N is a normal subgroup ofG, then the map
       Recall that the join           H V K of two subgroups                        is the              subgroup (H U K) generated               7r G —> G/N given by 7r(a) = aN is an epimorphism with kernel N.
                                                                                                                                                      :


by     H and K.
                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. If x £ Ker /and a £ G, then

Theorem 5.3. Let K and N be subgroups of a group G with N normal in G. Then                                                                                                       fifixcr*)   = f(a)f(x)f(a-i) = f(a)ef(a)-' = e

        (i) N D K a normal subgroup ofK;
                             is                                                                                                                  and axa~         l
                                                                                                                                                                      s   Ker /. Therefore a(Ker f)a~             l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C Ker / and Ker f   <\   G.       The map
       (ii) N a normal subgroup ofN V K;
                   is                                                                                                                            7r  G —» G/N is clearly surjective and since ir(ab) = abN = aNbN = ir(a)Tr(b),
                                                                                                                                                      :



       (iii)NK = N V K = KN;                                                                                                                     it is an epimorphism. Ker ir = a e G ir(a) = eN = N] = {a e G aN = N]
                                                                                                                                                                                                      {       |                                     |




       (iv) // K normal in G and K D N = (e), then nk = kn for allkeK and n e N.
                        is                                                                                                                       = {aeG\aeN\ = N

    PROOF, (i) If n e N D K and a s K, then ana' e N since N <\ G and ana' e K              1                                                1

                                                                                                                                                          The map 7r            G — G/ N is called the canonical epimorphism or projection. Here-
                                                                                                                                                                                      >
since K < G. Thus a(N D K)a~ (Z N        K and N C\ K <] K. (ii) is trivial since
                                                                                                                                                                            :
                                                          l

                                                                                                                                                 after      unless stated otherwise           G    G/N (N <\ G) always denotes the canonical
N < N V K. (iii) Clearly NK C N V An element X of AT V K is a product of the                                                                     epimorphism.
form«iA:i/*2&2- «r&r, with m £ A,
                         •        £ K (Theorem 2.8). Since N <\ G, n kj = kjn/,                                                  {


m' £ N and therefore x can be written in the form n(kr -k n £ N. Thus                                                 r ),


N V K d NK. Similarly KN = N V K. (iv) Let k K and n £ N. Then nkrr e K                             e
                                                                                                                                             1



since # < G and kn~ k~  N since N < G. Hence (nkn'^k' = nikn^k' s N D
                                  l       l
                                              e
                                                                                                                 1                   1
                                                                                                                                         )       Theorem 5.6. Iff     G —» H is a homomorphism ofgroups and^H is a normal subgroup
                                                                                                                                                                                  :



K = (e), which implies                            =                                                                                              ofG contained in the kernel off, then there is a unique homomorphism f G/N —> H                :



                                                                                                                                                 such that f(aN) = f(a) for all a £ G. Im f = Imf and Ker f = (Ker f)/N. f is an iso-
                                                                                                                                                 morphism if and only iff is an epimorphism and N = Ker f.
Theorem 5.4. //N « # normal subgroup of a group G          G/N /j se/ o/a// (left)
cosetsofN in G, //ze/z G/N w a grow/? of order [G N] ««der   binary operation given :

                                                                                                                                                    The essential part of the conclusion may be rephrased: there exists a unique
by (aN)(bN) = abN.
                                                                                                                                                 homomorphism /: G/N        //such that the diagram:

       PROOF. Since the coset aN [resp. bN, abN] is simply the equivalence class of
                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
a £ G [resp. b e G, ab e G] under the equivalence relation of congruence modulo N, it
suffices by Theorem 1.5 to show that congruence modulo Wis a congruence relation,
                                                                                                                                                                                              G                          //
               = a (mod AO and b = b (mod AO imply a bi = #6 (mod AO. By
that is, that ai                                              x                                              Y



assumption aia~ l = m £                   N
                            and Z>i/3 -1 = n 2 e N. Hence (aMiaby 1 = a\bib~ l ar l                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                              G/N
= (a n?)ar But since
        Y
          l
                   .    is normal, a  N                               N
                                          = Na which implies that a n 2 = « 3«i for
                                                                  x             x                                            Y



some «3 £ N. Consequently (aMiab)" 1 = (ain^ar = n z a\ar l = « 3 «i £ N, whence                1


                                                                                                                                                 is   commutative. Corollary 5.8 below may also be stated in terms of commutative
aibi    = ab (mod AO.
                                                                                                                                                 diagrams.

       If   N
          normal subgroup of a group G, then the group G/N, as in Theorem 5.4,
                is a

                  group or factor group of G by N. If G is written additively, then
is called the quotient                                                                                                                               PROOF OF 5.6. If b s aN, then b = an, n e N, and f(b) = f(an) = f(a) f(n)
the group operation in G/N is given by (a + AO + (b + AO = (a + b) + N.                                                                          = f(a)e = f(a), since N < Ker /. Therefore, / has the same effect on every element
                                                                                                                                                 of the coset aN and the map / G/N—> H given by f(aN) = f(a) is a well-defined
                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




     REMARK. If m >                   1   is      a (fixed) integer and & £ Z, then the remarks preceding                                        function. Since J(aNbN) = f(abN) = f(ab) = f(a)f(b) = f(aN)f(bN), / is a
Definition 4.1           show that the equivalence class of k under congruence modulo m is                                                       homomorphism. Clearly Im / = Im / and
                                                                        .




44                                       CHAPTER   I   GROUPS                                                                       5.            NORMALITY, QUOTIENT GROUPS, AND HOMOMORPHISMS                                          45


                           aN s Ker / <=>       f(a) = e            as Ker /,                                 Theorem 5.11. // f     G — H zs a« epimorphism of groups, then the assignment
                                                                                                                                                              :    >

                                                                                                              K i— f(K) defines a one-to-one correspondence between the set Sf(G) of all subgroups
                                                                                                                      >

whence Ker /= {aN\ a s Ker /} = (Ker f)/N. /is unique since it is completely
                                                                                                              KofG which contain Ker f and the set S(H) of all subgroups ofH. Under this corre-
determined by /. Finally it is clear that /is an epimorphism if and only if /is. By
                                                                                                             spondence normal subgroups correspond to normal subgroups.
Theorem 2.3 /is a monomorphism if and only if Ker / = (Ker /)/TVis the trivial sub-
group of G/TV which occurs if and only if Ker f = N.
               :
                                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. By Exercise 2.9 the assignment K\->f(K) defines a
                                                                                                             function <p Sf(G) —> S(H) and /_1 (7) is a subgroup of G for every subgroup / of H.
                                                                                                                                         :



                                                                                                             Since J < H implies Ker / < f~\J) and /(/_1 (/)) = -A <p is surjective. Exercise 18

Corollary 5.7. {First Isomorphism Theorem) If f G —> H          :            is   a homomorphism of          shows that f~Kf(K)) = Kif and only if Ker / < K. It follows that <p is injective. To
groups, then f induces an isomorphism G/   f   Im f         =                                                prove the last statement verify that K <\ G implies f(K) < H and J <] H implies
                                                                                                             f'KJ) < G. m

     PROOF. / G    :           Im /is an epimorphism. Apply Theorem 5.6 with TV = Ker/.
                                                                                                             Corollary 5.12.  //N is a normal subgroup of a group G, then every subgroup of G/N
                                                                                                             is of the form K/N, where K is a subgroup of G that contains N. Furthermore, K/N
Corollary 5.8. Iff    G — H « a homomorphism of groups, N < G, M < H, awd
                           :      >                                                                          /s normal in G/N z/a«^/      z/K normal in G.
f(TV) < M, then f induces a homomorphism f G/N — H/M,   :     by aN |-> f(a)M.
                                                                    >


    f is an isomorphism if and only iflmfV M = H and f (M)_c: N. In particular
                                                      _1                                                             PROOF. Apply Theorem 5.11 to the canonical epimorphism it G —> G/TV. If                           :




iff is an epimorphism such that f(N) =           M and Ker f (Z N, then f             is an   isomorphism.   N< K < G, then 7r(/Q = A'/                                TV.




     SKETCH OF PROOF. Consider the composition G -4 H A H/M and verify                                                                                                       EXERCISES
that TV   C /~W) = Ker       By Theorem 5.6 (applied to tt/) the map G/TV-> H/M
                                  tt/.

given by a TV!-* (tt/Xa) = f(a)M is a homomorphism that is an isomorphism if and                               1 .   If TV is a subgroup of index 2 in a group G, then TV is normal in G.
only if 7r/is an epimorphism and TV = Ker irf But the latter conditions hold if and
only if Im / V         M
                     = H and f~\M) d TV. If / is an epimorphism, then H = Im /                                2. If       {   TV,    !
                                                                                                                                             / s   /)   is   a family of normal subgroups of a group G, then f) TVt is a

= Im / V Af. If /(AO = Af and Ker / C TV, then f~KM) C TV, whence / is an                                            normal subgroup of G.
isomorphism.
                                                                                                              3.     Let TV be a subgroup of a group G. TV is normal in G if and only if (right) con-
                                                                                                                     gruence modulo TV is a congruence relation on G.


Corollary 5.9. (Second Isomorphism Theorem) IfK and N are subgroups of a group
                                                                                                              4.     Let ~ be an equivalence relation on a group G and letTV = {aeG|a~e).
                                                 K) ^ NK/N.
                                                                                                                     Then ~ a congruence relation on G and only TV a normal subgroup of G
                                                                                                                                             is                                         if         if   is
G, w/r/z N Azorma/ /« G,                 K/(N
                                                                                                                     and ~   congruence modulo
                                                                                                                                         is                                  TV.


                                                                                                                     Let TV < S4 consist of all those permutations a such that cr(4) = 4. Is TV normal
  PROOF. N < NK = N V K by Theorem 5.3. The composition K^> NK-^
                                                                                                              5.

                                                                                                                     in 5*4?
NK/N is a homomorphism /with kernel K f) N, whence /: D TV^ Im /by
Corollary 5.7. Every element in NK/N is of the form nkN(n s                      NM   e /Q. The normal-       6.     Let      H < G; then the set a/fa-1                         is   a subgroup for each as G, and        H^ aHa~   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .



ity of TV implies that nk = km (m e TV), whence /?£TV = kn,N = kN = f(k). There-

fore /is an epimorphism and hence Im / = NK/N.
                                                                                                              7.     Let G be a finite group and // a subgroup of G of order «. If                             H   is the only sub-

                                                                                                                     group of G of order n, then // is normal in G.

                                                                                                              8.     All subgroups of the quaternion group are normal (see Exercises 2.3 and 4.14).

Corollary 5.10. (7%/>J Isomorphism Theorem). If H                           WK
                                                         ar^ normal subgroups
                                                                 of G/K and
                                                                                                              9.     (a) If         G is a group, then the center of G is a normal subgroup of G (see Ex-
of a group G  s«c/z that   < H,   K
                                 then H/K  zs a normal subgroup                                                      ercise 2.11);
(G/K)/(H/K)        ^ G/H.                                                                                            (b) the center of S n is the identity subgroup for all n                           > 2.
                                                                                                             10.     Find subgroups                          H and K of D * such that //< K and AT< Z) *, but H
                                                                                                                                                                             4                                     4           is   not
   PROOF. The identity map \g G —> G has G (iQ < //and therefore induces an
                                                            l
                                                                                                                     normal in D4 *.
epimorphism / G/K-> G/H, with I(aK) = aH. Since H = I(aK) if and only if
                       :



asH, Ker /= {aK\aeH\ = H/K. Hence H/K < G/^ by Theorem 5.5 and                                               11. If // is a cyclic subgroup of a group                                G and //is normal in G, then every subgroup
(7/// = Im / ^ «7//0/Ker / = (G/K)/(H/K) by Corollary 5.7.                                                           of His normal in G. [Compare Exercise 10.]
                                                                                                                                                                                             /




46                                                                                          CHAPTER                        I           GROUPS                                                                                                                                   6.                SYMMETRIC, ALTERNATING, AND DIHEDRAL GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47



12. If          H       is a         normal subgroup of a group G such that //and G/H are finitely gen-                                                                                                                                                (remember: permutations are functions and ar means r followed by a); similarly
         erated, then so is G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t<j      = (1432)(125) = (2543) so that ar 9^ ra. There is one case, however, when two
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       permutations do commute.
13. (a)             Let          H < G, K < G. Show that H \/ K                                                                                          is   normal in G.
         (b)Prove that the set of all normal subgroups of G forms a complete lattice
         under inclusion (Introduction, Exercise 7.2).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Definition 6.2. The permutations 0-1,0-2,                                                                                                                 .       .       .        <r T        ofS n are said to be disjoint provided
                M < d, N < G then (M X #2) < (d X G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,

14. If                                                    2            2                                                                                          2)    and (d X G 2 )/(M X #2)                                                        that for each                  1           <               i        < r, and every k e I n o-i(k) ^ k implies o-j(k) = k for all j ^                          ,                                                                                                                                                      i.

         ^ (Gi/M) X (G /A^                                    2        2 ).



15.      Let            N <\ G and # <1 G. If N                                                                  f)       K = (e) and AT V # = G, then G/N^K.                                                                                                   In other words 0-1, o- 2                                                  ,       .           .       .           ,       ov are disjoint if and only if no element of In is moved
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       by more than one of a u                                                                                                        o>. It is easy to see that ra                                                                   = ar whenever a and r are
                            G — // is a homomorphism, // is abelian and Af is a subgroup of G con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .           .       .           ,

16. If /:                            >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       disjoint.
         taining Ker /, then                                       N           is       normal in G.

17. (a)             Consider the subgroups (6) and (30) of Z and show that (6)/(30)^Z5                                                                                                                                                            .




         (b)        For any k,m > 0, (k)/(km)^Zm                                                                                   ;    in particular,                       Z/(m) = (\)/{m)^Zm                                                   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 6.3. Every nonidentity permutation in S n is uniquely (up to the order of the
18. If     f:G—* H is a homomorphism with kernel N and K < G, then prove that                                                                                                                                                                         factors) a product of disjoint cycles, each of which has length at least 2.

         f'Kf(fO) = JW. Hence f-\f(K)) = K and only \i N < K.                                                                          '\i




19. If W < G, [G AH finite, // < G, \H\ finite, and [G N] and          are relatively                                                                                                             |//|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. Let aeSny a ^ (1). Verify that the following is an
    prime, then H < N.
                                                          :                                                                                                             :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~ y if and only if y = m (x) for some m s Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      equivalence relation on /„ for x,y e /n x                                                       :                                                ,                                                                                                      <j

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The equivalence classes {B            < s\ oi this equivalence relation are called the                      :       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \    <       i

20. If AT « G,       finite, H < G, [G   H] finite, and [G H] and
                                            I
                                                    Af|                are relatively                                 :                                                 :                         |AT|                                                orbits of a and form a partition of In (Introduction, Theorem 4.1). Note that if x s B                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i9

    prime, then N < H.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                then Bi= {u x ~ u\ = {a m (x) \meZ\. Let B U B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B (1 < r < s) be those                                                                                                                   2,    .       .       .       ,       T

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      orbits that contain more than one element each (r > 1 since a ^ (1)). For each
21. If H                            and // ^ Z(p°°), then Z(p°)/H ^ Z(/>°°). [///«/: if
                                                                                            00
            a subgroup o fZQ?
                        is                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      / < r define en eS n by:
    7/ = (!//>»), let x = l//? n+i + //and apply Exercise 3.7(e).]
                                                              t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              „ (y \ _                 M*)                               if           xeB         { ;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [X                            if           Jfj   B     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.




6.       SYMMETRIC, ALTERNATING, AND DIHEDRAL GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                                  Each Oi is a well-defined nonidentity permutation of /„ since a                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /?,         is          a bijection
         In this section we shall study in some detail the symmetric group S n and certain                                                                                                                                                            B — B{     >   t .   0-1,0-2,       .       .       .       ,       <j t       are disjoint permutations since the sets B u                                                                                        B are mu-                                                  .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,         r


of its subgroups. By definition S n is the group of all bijections In                                                                                                                            — h, where h =                                       tually disjoint. Finally verify that a = <n a 2                                                                                                                    -       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o>; (note that x e 2?, implies o-(x) = o-.(x)

{   1,2,   .    .   .
                        ,
                            n}   .   The elements of S n are called permutations. In addition to the notation                                                                                                                                         if /      < r and a(x) = x if > r; use disjointness). We must show that each    /                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o-,       is a cycle.

given on page 26 for permutations inS„ there is another standard notation:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     < r), then since B is finite there is a least positive integer d such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                If x e /?t (/                                                                                                              t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d= <ji(x) for some j (0 < j < d). Since a d- '(x) = x and < d — j < d, we must
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (x)                                                                                                                                                                            J



Definition 6.1. Let ii,i 2                                             ,   .   .    .
                                                                                        ,       ir ,       (r    < n) be distinct elements ofl n = {1,2,                                                                      .   .   .   n|.         have 7 =     and a d (x) = x. Hence (xa(x)a (x)             o-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (x)) is a well-defined cycle of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                •   •




Then           (iii 2 i3                 i r)        denotes the permutation                                                           that              maps      ii   |—> i 2 ,       i2   H      13,          is    H" U,          •   •   •   ,   length at least 2. If a m (x) e       then w = ad + 6 for some a,Z> e Z such that < b < d.
         1— > i r , and i r »-» ii, and maps every other element ofl n onto itself. (iii 2                                                                                                                                   is called                Hence a m (x) = a b+ad (x) = a b a ad (x) = a b(x) e {x,o-(x),o- (x),             ~
i r _i
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i r)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a d (x) .Therefore                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |


a cycle of length r or an x-cycle; a 2-cycle is called a transposition.                                                                                                                                                                               # = {x,o-(x),o- (x),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                        o-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d_1 (jc)|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and it follows that a, is the cycle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .    .     .    ,




         The cycle notation is not unique (see below); indeed, strictly speaking, the cycle                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .       (xa(x)aKx)-'a d ~Kx)).
notation is ambiguous since (h                                                              •     •    •
                                                                                                           ir)   may be an element of any S n n > r. In context,                         ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Suppose t u                                                r are disjoint cycles such that a = t t 2                                                                                                                                                            Let x e In be such
however, this will cause no confusion. A 1 -cycle (k) is the identity permutation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .                                                                                                                                                                               -       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,          t                                                                                                                                                    y                                   t .




Clearly, an /--cycle is an element of order r in S n Also observe that if r is a cycle and                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that a(x)             ^ x. By disjointness there exists a unique y (1 < j < t) with o-(x) = r,(x).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Since ar, = r o-, we have a k (x) = rfix) for all k e Z. Therefore, the orbit of x under
t(x)       ^ x for some x e /n then r = (xt(x)t (x)                ,
                                                                                                                               2             •       •
                                                                                                                                                         r d (x)) for some d>\. The inverse                                                                                       7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T j is precisely the orbit of x under 0-, say B{ Consequently, r (>>) = a(y) for every
of the cycle (hi2                               -   •
                                                          ir) is   the cycle (zV/r _i/r _ 2                                    -   •
                                                                                                                                       -kh) = (iii                r i r ~iir-2-     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 ) (verify!).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >>  B (since y = a n (x) = r n (x) for some « e Z). Since 77 is a cycle it has only one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e     {                                                                                                7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nontrivial orbit (verify!), which must be B since x ^ a(x) = t (jc). Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                                 a 4 " c y cle: T = (1432)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
         EXAMPLES. The permutation r =                                                                                                                                      is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T i(y) = y for all y § B whence r = a A suitable inductive argument shows that
                                                                                                                               Q                 ^            ^   3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r = t and (after reindexing)      = r for each = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {,                                                            7            t.


= (4321) = (3214) = (2143). If a is the 3-cycle (125), then err = (125)(1432) = (1435)                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r.                                                 o-,                          t                                 /                        .       .       .       ,
48                                                                                                             CHAPTER                          I               GROUPS                                                                                                                                      6.       SYMMETRIC, ALTERNATING, AND DIHEDRAL GROUPS                                                                                 49



Corollary 6.4. The order of a permutation a s S n is the least common multiple of the                                                                                                                                                                                  T2   T (/i)) = ••• = (- iyA(l,2, ...,«) = A(l, 2, ... /i). Similarly A(r(l),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r                                                                                     ,                                      .   .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r(n))

orders of its disjoint cycles.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = (- 1)«A(1,2, ...,«)= - A(l,2,       n), whence A(l,2, ...,«)= - A(l,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                                                                  .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       This is a contradiction since A(l,2, ...,«) ^ 0.

   PROOF. Let a = ov -ov, with {a { disjoint cycles. Since disjoint cycles com-                 •
                                                                                                                                            }



mute, a m = o-r-    a™ for all m e Z and o- m = (1) if and only if oV" = (1) for all /.
                                                       •       -




Therefore <j
             m = (1) if and only if   divides m for all / (Theorem 3.4). Since \a\ is                                   H                                                                                                                                              Theorem 6.8. For each n > 2,         An      the set of all even permutations of S n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Then A n is a normal subgroup ofS n of index 2 and order |S n |/2 = n!/2. Furthermore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




the least such m, the conclusion follows.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A n is the only subgroup ofS Q of index 2.

Corollary 6.5. Every permutation in S n can be written as a product of {not necessarily                                                                                                                                                                                         The group A n is called the alternating group on n letters or the alternating group of
disjoint) transpositions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              degree n.


     PROOF. It suffices by Theorem 6.3 to show that every cycle is a product                                                                                                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.8. Let C be the multiplicative subgroup {1,-1}
of transpositions. This is easy: (xi) = (xix )(xiX2) and for r > 1, (xix xz x)                                                                                      2                                                              2       •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r       of the integers. Define a map /: S n — > C by a |-> sgn a and verify that / is an epimor-
= (XiXr)(XiX -l)'                       r                  '   '(xiXz)(XiX 2 ).                                                                                                                                                                                        phism of groups. Since the kernel of /is clearly A n A n is normal in S n By the First         ,                                      .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Isomorphism Theorem S n /A n                                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C, which implies [Sn A n = 2 and \A n = \S n \/2.                           :       ]                  \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A n is the unique subgroup of S n of index 2 by Exercise 6.
Definition 6.6.                                        A permutation r s S n is said to be even [resp. odd] ifr can be written
as a product of an even [resp. odd] number of transpositions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Definition 6.9.                               A group G is said to be simple z/G has no proper normal subgroups.
   The sign of a permutation r, denoted sgn r, is 1 or — 1 according as r is even or
odd. The fact that sgn r is well defined is an immediate consequence of                                                                                                                                                                                                   The only simple abelian groups are theZp with p prime (Exercise 4.3). There are a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       number of nonabelian simple groups; in particular, we have

Theorem 6.7. A permutation in S n (n > 2) cannot be both even and odd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 6.10. The alternating group A n is simple if and only ifn j± 4.
     PROOF. Let /i,/                                                           2,   .   .   .
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                         in     be the integers 1,2,                                           .       .       .   ,   n in some order and define
A(/i,   .   .   .
                        ,       /„)       — k), where the product is taken over all pairs
                                            to be the integer \\ (/,                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The proof we shall give is quite elementary. It will be preceded by two lemmas.
(jjc)       such that                                      1           <j<k<n. Note that A(/i,
                                                              n ) ^ 0. We first compute                                                                                            .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Recall that if r is a 2-cycle, r 2 = (1) and hence r = r _1                                                        .



A(o-(/i),      o-(/„)) when a eS n is a transposition, say a = (idd) with c < d. We have
                    .    .      .
                                    ,



       ...,/„) = (ic - id)ABCDEFG, where

                             * =                   II
                                                 j <k
                                                                                0"»         -           *"*);
                                                                                                                           n -
                                                                                                                            B =
                                                                                                                                            j <c
                                                                                                                                                                                                           c = II a,- - u);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                j <c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lemma 6.11. Let r,s be distinct elements of 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <k<n,k^r,s).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       erated by the ^-cycles f(rsk) |1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   n).         Then A n (n > 3) is gen-

                                              j k 5*c d
                                               t                       t




                    c>              =         II
                                             c<j<d
                                                                           0i - '*);                                    e= n
                                                                                                                          c<k<d
                                                                                                                                -                                   ('c        /*);                            ^=   n&-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d<k                                                   PROOF. Assume n > 3 (the case n = 3 is trivial). Every element of A n is a
                                                                                                                        G=H -                               (id             /*).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       product of terms of the form (ab)(cd) or (ab)(ac), where a,b,c,d are distinct elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {        n) Since (ab)(cd) = (acb)(acd) and (ab)(ac) = (acb), A n is generated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .   ,        .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the set of all 3-cycles. Any 3-cycle is of the form (rsa), (ras), (rab), (sab), or (abc),
We write cr(y4) for                                                            H
                                                                               <k
                                                                                            ((j(/y)                 -                       and similarly for a(B), cr(C), etc. Verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       where a,b,c are distinct and a,b,c ^ r,s. Since (ras) = (rsa)\ (rab) = (rsb)(rsa)\
                                                                           1            d                                                                                                                                                                              (sab)= (rsb) 2 (rsa), and (abc) = (rsa) 2 (rsc)(rsb) 2 (rsa), A n is generated by
a(A) = A; a(B)        =C and a(C) = B; a(D) = (-ly-^E and a(E) = (-lY'^D;
(j(F)       = G, and a(G) = F. Finally, <r(i - d) = cr(i ) - <r(id) = id - = -(/ - id).                                             c                   i                     c                                           ic           e                                                                                         {(rj*)   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1   <*</!,*             r,s}.

Consequently,

AW/.),                                      <Ki n      » =     - UMAMB).                                                                            •
                                                                                                                                                                a(G)        = (-l)i^( d -c-i )(/c _ id)ABCDEFG
                    -       .   .
                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lemma 6.12. //N is a normal subgroup ofA Q (n > 3) and N contains a 3-cycle, then
                                                         = -A(/i,    n ).                                  .    .   .   ,   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N = An               .




    Suppose for some r eS n r = ti- -r T and r = ci- -a s with r c, transposi-                             ,
                                                                                                                                        •                                                                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t,


tions, r even and s odd. Then for (z\, ...,/„) = (1,2, ... n) the previous paragraph                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PROOF. If (rsc) e N, then for any A: ^ r^c, (™A:) = (rs)(ck)(rsc) (ck)(rs)                                                                      2


implies A(r(l),       r(n)) = A(rr     r r (l),  tv r r («)) = -A(r 2 -r r (l),
                                                   .       .       .
                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                  •                                        -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = [(^Xc/c)]^) ^^)^)]- e Af. Hence N = A n by Lemma 6.11.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2           1
50                                                        CHAPTER                           I   GROUPS                                                                                                                           6.                SYMMETRIC, ALTERNATING, AND DIHEDRAL GROUPS                                                                                                                     51


          PROOF OF THEOREM 6.10. A = (1) and A is the simple cyclic group of    2                                               z                                                                       Any group G which is generated by elements a,b £ G satisfying (/) and (ii) for some
order 3. It is easy to verify that {(1),(12)(34),(13)(24),(14)(23))                                  normal subgroup                                    is a                                            n > 3 (with e £ G in place 0/(1)) is isomorphic to D n                                                                                        .



of A A (Exercise 7). If n > 5 and                                 N     is a nontrivial normal subgroup of A n we shall

show TV = A n by considering the possible cases.                                                                                                                                                                 SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that a,b e D n as defined above satisfy (i) and (ii),
                                                                                                                                                                                                       whence D n = (a,b) = {a b^                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               < < n\ j = 0,1 (see Theorem 2.8). Then verify
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /                              }

          CASE 1. TV contains a 3-cycle; hence TV = A n by Lemma 6.12.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \




                                                                                                                                                                                                       that the 2n elements a b (0 <                         {     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /       < n\ j = 0,1) are all distinct (just check their action
                                                                                                                                                                                                       on 1 and 2), whence \D n = 2n.                                  \




   CASE 2. N contains an element a, the product of disjoint cycles, at least one of                                                                                                                        Suppose G is a group generated by a,b e G and a,b satisfy (i) and (ii) for some
which has length r > 4. Thus a = (aia -a )T (disjoint). Let 8 = (aya a ) e A n Then
                                                                            2
                                                                                -       •
                                                                                                r                                                                    2   z        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       n>3. By Theorem 2.8 every element of G is a finite product a mi b m2a m *b m b mk (mi e Z).                                                                    * •       •       •



a' l (8cr8~ ) e    J
                             N by normality. But                                                                                                                                                       By repeated use of (i) and (ii) any such product may be written in the form a b with                                                                                                          {   J




                 a'H^dad' ) = r~\aia r a T -\
                                 1                        •       •
                                                                      a 2 )(aia 2 a z)(a\a 2                •   •       •
                                                                                                                            a r )r(a\a z a 2 ) = (fli^r) s N.                                            < / < n and j = 0,1 (in particular note that b 2 = e and (ii) imply b = b~ and                                                                                                                  l



                                                                                                                                                                                                       ab = ba~ ). Denote the generators of D n by a u b to avoid confusion and verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x


Hence TV = ,4 n by Lemma 6.12.                                                                                                                                                                         the map/: D n ^>G given by a^b^ — a'b j is an epimorphism of groups. To complete
                                                                                                                                                                                                       the proof we show that /is a monomorphism. Suppose / (a^bs) = a b = e e G with                                                                             {         J



          CASE 3. TV contains an element a, the product of disjoint cycles, at least two of                                                                                                              < / < n and j = 0,1. If j = 1, then a { = 6 and by (ii) a i+l = a {a = ba = a~ b                                                                                                                      l


which have length 3, so that a = (ai^^to^^r^disjoint). Let 8 = (aia 2a 4 ) e A n                                                                                                                   .    = ar a = a -\ which implies a = e. This contradicts (i) since n > 3. Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l   {         {                                                                 2


Then as above, TV contains a~\8a8 _1 ) = T~ (a A a^)(a\a z a 2)(aia 2a 4)(aia 2az)(a 4 a^a^T            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                       j = Oande = a b° = a with       < / < «, which implies / = by (i). Thus/(0i "V) = e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {              1                                                                                                                                  l



(a\dia^ = (aia^a^a^). Hence TV = A n by case 2.                                                                                                                                                        implies a^b^ = ai°bi° = (1). Therefore / is a monomorphism by Theorem 2.3.


          CASE 4. TV contains an element a that is the product of one 3-cycle and some                                                                                                                           This theorem is an example of a characterization of a group in terms of "genera-
2-cycles, say                    a = (a^a^r (disjoint), with r a product of disjoint 2-cycles. Then                                                                                                    tors and relations."                                 A detailed discussion of this idea will be given in Section 9.
a 2 e TV and a 2 = (aia 2 az)T(aia 2 az)r = (a\a 2 a?) 2 r 2 = (a\a 2 a^) 2 = (a\a z a 2 ), whence TV = A n
by Lemma 6.12.


          CASE 5. Every element of TV is the product of (an even number of) disjoint                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXERCISES
2-cycles.              Let a e TV, with a = (aia 2 )(aza 4 )T (disjoint). Let                                                                       8       = (aia a ) e A n
                                                                                                                                                                     2   z        \   then              1.       Find four different subgroups of S 4 that are isomorphic to S 3 and nine iso-
     _1           _1
(7        (5cr5        ) s   TV as above.         Now G~\hvh~ ) = r~ (azaA)(aia )(a\a a^(aia )(aza )r(a\a a )
                                                                                    l                   l
                                                                                                                                            2           2            2        4        z       2                 morphic to S 2                     .



 = (fli03)(tf20 ). Since n > 5, there is an element & £ 1,2,
                             4                                            n) distinct from                                          j               .   .    .   ,



#1,02,03,04- Since £ = (aia b) £    and f = (aia )(a a ) £ TV, f(£f £ _1 ) £ TV. But f(£f £ -1 )                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2. (a)          S n is generated by the n - 1 transpositions (12), (13), (14),                                                                        .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (In). [Hint:
                                              z                                                     3                       4

 = (ai03)fe04)(#i03^)(0i03)te04)(0i^03) = (Qidzb) £ TV. Hence TV = A n by Lemma 6.12.                                                                                                                            (l/)(ly)(l/)          = (//).]
    Since the cases listed cover all the possibilities, A n has no proper normal sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) S n is generated by the n                                                 - 1 transpositions (12), (23), (34),                               .    .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (n   —       1   n).

groups and hence is simple.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [Hint: (\j) = (1 j                          - l)(j -                          1y)(l j - 1); use (a).]
                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 If a      = (i\i    2 -       •   ./r )    zS n and r eSn then rar'                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is   the r-cycle (r(/i)r(/2 )-                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r(/r )).
   Another important subgroup of S n (n > 3) is the subgroup D n generated by
a = (123   n) and        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                        4. (a)       S n is generated by a = (12) and r = (123- n). [Hint: Apply Exercise 3 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        = tctit -1 cr 3 = T(T 2 T~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <7i, <T2                           (j n ~\ = T<T n -iT~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                and use Exercise 2(b).]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x


            (\          2            3    4                   5                                                                                         n - 1            «\                                      (b) S n is generated by (12) and (23-
b =
                                                                            •           •
                                                                                                            /                           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n).                                                          •




            \1        «-l «-2
                       «                              /2-3                  •••                 n   + 2-i                               •••                      3       2/
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.       Let cr,r £ S n If a is even (odd), then so is rar~ l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                                                                                                  .



      =            YL    n + 2 —     (i             /).   D n is called the dihedral group of degree n. The group
           2<i<n+2-i                                                                                                                                                                                    6.       A n is the only subgroup of Sn of index 2. [Hint: Show that a subgroup of index 2
D n is isomorphic to and usually identified with the group of all symmetries of a regular                                                                                                                        must contain all 3-cycles of S n and apply Lemma 6.11.]
polygon with n sides (Exercise 13). In particular D is (isomorphic to) the group D *                                A                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.       Show that N = {(1),(12)(34),(13)(24),(14)(23)) is a normal subgroup of 5 4 con-
of symmetries of the square (see pages 25-26).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tained in A 4 such that S / N = S 3 and AJN ^ Z3              4                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.       The group A A has no subgroup of order 6.
Theorem 6.13. For each n > 3 the dihedral group D n is a group of order 2n whose
generators a and b satisfy:
                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.        For n > 3 let G n be the multiplicative group of complex matrices generated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1\         / e 2Tri/n                                                 o         \
           (i)    a n = (1); b 2 = (1); a k ^ (1) if                                    < k < n;                                                                                                                           (0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1       QJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and y =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _ 2irt/n   where i 2 = -1. 5how that                                            Gn ^ D n           .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            J,
          (ii)    ba = a_1 b.                                                                                                                                                                                    (Hint: recall that e                        2vi       = 1 and e                               k2Ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^ 1, where k is real, unless k £ Z.)
                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :       »                                    .




52                                                       CHAPTER                           I           GROUPS                                                                                                   7.       CATEGORIES: PRODUCTS, COPRODUCTS, AND FREE OBJECTS                                                                                                                         53



10.     Let a be the generator of order n of D n                                                       .       Show that (a) < Dn and D n/(a)^Z2                                    .              (II) Identity.                         For each object B of Q there exists a morphism 1 B                                                                                  :   B — B such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >


                                                                                                                                                                                             that for any f                   :       A -> B, g B -> C,                   :


1 1 .    Find all normal subgroups of D n                                 .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1   B           f   = f and             g o 1 B = g.
12.      The center (Exercise 2.11) of the group D n is (e) if n is odd and isomorphic toZ2
         if n is even.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A — B is called an equivalence if there is in (B a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   In a category Q a morphism /                                                                       :           >


13. For each n > 3 let Pn be a regular polygon of n sides (for n = 3, Pn is an equi-                                                                                                     morphism g                          : 2?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      — A such that g f =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I a and f  g = l B The composite of two
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >                                                                                                                        .




    lateral triangle; for n = 4, a square). A symmetry of P« is a bijection P —>P                                                                                          rt       rt
                                                                                                                                                                                         equivalences, when defined, is an equivalence. Iff A — B is an equivalence, A and                                                                :




         that preserves distances          and maps adjacent vertices onto adjacent vertices.                                                                                            B are said to be equivalent.
               (a)   The set D n * of all symmetries of Pn is a group under the binary operation
         of composition of functions.                                                                                                                                                              EXAMPLE. Let S be the class of all sets; for A,B s S, hom04,i?) is the set of
               Every fe D n * is completely determined by its action on the vertices of Pn
               (b)                                                                                                                                                                   .   all functions   / A — B. Then S is easily seen to be a category. By (13) of Introduc-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :                    >


         Number the vertices consecutively 1,2, „ n; then each fe D n * determines a                       .   .   ,                                                                     tion, Section 3, a morphism /of S is an equivalence if and only if /is a bijection.
         unique permutation ay of {1,2,          n] The assignment /|—> ay defines a mono-
                                                                  .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                   .



         morphism of groups (p D n * -^Sn            :                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. Let g be the category whose objects are all groups; hom(A B) is                                                                                                                         y

           (c) £> n * is generated by / and g, where / is a rotation of 27t/a7 degrees about the                                                                                         the set of all group homomorphisms /      A — B. By Theorem 2.3, a morphism / is an                                  :       >

         center of Pn and g is a reflection about the "diameter" through the center and                                                                                                  equivalence if and only if / is an isomorphism. The category a of all abelian groups
         vertex 1.                                                                                                                                                                       is       defined similarly.
                                                                                                           2           3                                1
               (d) a f = (123-      •
                                            n)       and         ag = ( \
                                                                                                                                           72
                                                                                                                                                7                "\       whence
                                                                                          \1               n       n — 11      •   •   •        3                2/                          EXAMPLE. A (multiplicative) group G can be considered as a category with
         Im <p = D n and £>„* ^ £>„.                                                                                                                                                     one object, G. Let hom(G,G) be the set of elements of G; composition of morphisms
                                                                                                                                                                                         a,b is simply the composition ab given by the binary operation in G. Every morphism
                                                                                                                                                                                         is an equivalence (since every element of G has an inverse). 1<? is the identity element

                                                                                                                                                                                         eof G.
7.      CATEGORIES: PRODUCTS, COPRODUCTS, AND
        FREE OBJECTS                                                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE. Let the objects be all partially ordered sets (5,<). A morphism
        Since we now have several examples at hand, this is an appropriate time to intro-                                                                                                (£,<)-> (T,<) is a function f :S^T such that for x,y s 5, x < y => f(x) < f(y).
duce the concept of a category. Categories will serve as a useful language and provide
a general context for dealing with a number of different mathematical situations.                                                                                                           EXAMPLE. Let (B be any category and define the category 5) whose objects
They are studied in more detail in Chapter X.                                                                                                                                            are all morphisms of (5. If /   A — B and g C — D are morphisms of 6, then                       :               >                   :               >


        The intuitive idea underlying the definition of a category is that several of the                                                                                                hom(fg) consists of all pairs (a,0), where a A —> C, B —> D are morphisms                                                        :                                    /5   :




mathematical objects already introduced (sets, groups, monoids) or to be introduced                                                                                                      of 6 such that the following diagram is commutative
(rings, modules) together with the appropriate maps of these objects (functions for
sets; homomorphisms for groups, etc.) have a number of formal properties in com-
mon. For example, in each case composition of maps (when defined) is associative;
each object A has an identity map 1a                                      :   A — A with certain properties. These notions
                                                                                               >


are formalized in


                                                                                                                                                                                         Definition 7.2. Let Q be a category and {Ai I e I a family of objects of (B. A                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }


Definition 7.1.            A category is a class 6 of objects (denoted A ,B,C,                                                                  .   .       .)   together with           product for the familyAi i e I is an object P of Q together with a family of mor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {              |               j



                                                                                                                                                                                         phisms 7Ti P                             —
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ai i s Ij such that for any object B and family of morphisms
               a class of disjoint sets, denoted hom(A,B), one for each pair of objects in Q ;(an                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :                >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I

        (i)

element 'f of hom(A,B) is called a morphism from                                                                       A/oB and is denoted f                          :   A — B);
                                                                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                                                                         I<Pi B —> Ai i £ I there is a unique morphism <p B P such that ir^ ° <p = (p- for
                                                                                                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I                 j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      —    >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x


                                                                                                                                                                                         all i £ I.
        (ii)   for each triple (A,B,C) of objects ofQa function

                                        hom(B,C) X hom(A,B) -> hom(A,C);                                                                                                                          A product P of Ai                            {               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i e       I\ is usually denoted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  JJ A            {.       It is sometimes helpful to de-

(for      morphisms        f   :   A — B, g B — C, this function is written (g,f) hg°f and
                                        >                :        >
                                                                                                                                                                                         scribe a product in terms of commutative diagrams, especially in the case / =
g © f          A — C is called the composite of f and g); all subject to the two axioms:
                     >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         j   1,2}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A P ^ A such
          :


                                                                                                                                                                                         A product for {A A                               l9           2 }         is   a diagram (of objects and morphisms) A x                                                                         2


        (I)     Associativity. Iff               :   A — B g B — C, h C — D are morphisms of Q, then
                                                             >        :                        *                   :       >                                                             that: for any other diagram of the form A x V-                                                                                       B           A           2,   there is a unique morphism
h o (g o f) = (h o g) o f                                                                                                                                                                ^    :   2?   — P such that the following diagram is commutative:
                                                                                                                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                           i




54                                                    CHAPTER        I   GROUPS                                                                                               7.   CATEGORIES: PRODUCTS, COPRODUCTS, AND FREE OBJECTS                          55



                                                                                                                                                                       There is no uniform notation for coproducts, although JjA is sometimes used.

                                                                                                                                                              In the next two sections we shall discuss coproducts in the category g of groups
                                                                                                                                                              and the category Q of abelian groups. The following theorem may be proved by
                                                                                                                                                              using the "dual argument" to the one used to prove Theorem 7.3 (do it!).

             A family of objects in a category need not have a product. In several familiar
categories, however, products always exist. For example, in the category of sets the
                                                                                                                                                              Theorem 7.5. If*(S,{ n}) and (S' ,{Ai}) are both coproducts for the family {Ai               ielj of
Cartesian product                     JJ A   {   is   a product of the family {A {        |
                                                                                                  /e/} by Introduction,                                                                                                                                |




                                                                                                                                                              objects of a category (2, then S and S' are equivalent.
Theorem 5.2. In the next section we shall show that products exist in the category of
groups.                                                                                                                                                               In several of the categories mentioned above (for example, groups), every object
                                                                                                                                                                                                       some additional structure) and every
                                                                                                                                                              in the category is in fact a set (usually with
                                                                                                                                                          morphism / A — B in the category is a function on the "underlying sets" (usually
                                                                                                                                                                                   :     >


                                                                                                                                                          with some other properties as well). We formalize this idea in
Theorem 7.3. // (P,{7Ti}) and (Q,{^i}) are both products of the family Ai                                              {         |
                                                                                                                                      i       s 1}   of
objects of a category C, then P and Q are equivalent.


             PROOF. Since P and Q are both products, there exist morphisms f :P—> Q and                                                                       Definition 7.6.          A concrete category is a category C together with a function a that
g    :   Q-^P such that the following diagrams are commutative for each                                                    / s   /:                       assigns to each object              A of (2 a set <r(A) (called the underlying set of A) in such a way
                                                                                                                                                          that:


                                                                                                                                                                       (i)    every morphism    A —> B of Q is a function on the underlying sets a(A) —> c(B);
                                                                                                                                                                       (ii)   the identity   morphism of each object A of C is the identity function on the
                                                                                                                                                          underlying set <r(A);
                                                               A;         At                                                                                          (iii)   composition of morphisms in G agrees with composition of functions on the
                                                                                                                                                          underlying sets.
Composing these gives for each                             /   s / a commutative diagram:


                                                                                                                                                             EXAMPLES. The category of groups, equipped with the function that assigns to
                                                                                                                                                          each group its underlying set in the usual sense, is a concrete category. Similarly the
                                                                                                                                                          categories of abelian groups and partially ordered sets, with the obvious underlying
                                                                                                                                                          sets, are concrete categories.                However, in the third example after Definition 7.1, if
                                                                                                                                                          the function a assigns to the group G the usual underlying set G, then the categoiy in
                                                                                                                                                          question is not a concrete category (since the morphisms are not functions on the

Thus go f P — P is a morphism such that 7i\ ° (g ° f) = 7r for all s /. But by the
                                                                                                                                                          set G).
                      :   >                                                                   t                    z


definition of product there is a unique morphism with this property. Since the map
1 p P —> P is also such that w o 1 p = Ti for all / s /, we must have g° f = 1 p by
         :                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                      Concrete categories are frequently useful since one has available not only the
uniqueness. Similarly, using the fact that Q is a product, one shows that f°g= 1q.                                                                        properties of a category, but also certain properties of sets, subsets, etc. Since in
Hence / P — > Q is an equivalence.
                  :
                                                                                                                                                          virtually every concrete category we are interested in, the function a assigns to an
                                                                                                                                                          object its underlying set in the usual sense (as in the examples above), we shall denote

         Since abstract categories involve only objects and morphisms (no elements),                                                                      both the object and its underlying set by the same symbol and omit any explicit refer-
every statement about them has a dual statement, obtained by reversing all the                                                                            ence to a. There is little chance of confusion since we shall be careful in a concrete
arrows (morphisms) in the original statement. For example, the dual of Definition                                                                         category Q to distinguish morphisms of C (which are by definition also functions
7.2 is                                                                                                                                                    on the underlying sets) and maps (functions on the underlying sets, which may not be
                                                                                                                                                          morphisms of (2).



Definition 7.4. A coproduct (or sum) for the family Ai i s I of objects in a cate-{                j
                                                                                                                                                          Definition 7.7. Let F be an object in a concrete category C, X a nonempty set, and
                                                                                      |




gory C is an object S of 6, together with a family of morphisms    Ai — > S i s 1}                     {       x   :                      |



                                                                                                                                                            X —> F a map (of sets). F is free on the set X provided that for any object A of Q
such that for any object B and family of morphisms {^i Ai — > B i s I
                                                                                                                                                          i       :

                                                                        there is a
                                                                                                                                                          and map (ofsets) f X — > A, there exists a unique morphism of
                                                                                      :                                    ,
                                                                                                           |           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f :F-^A,such that
unique morphism \p S — > B such that \f/ o ti =
                                                                                                                                                                                         :

                                                for all i s I.
                                                                                                                                                          f = f (as a map of sets X — A).
                              '   :

                                                                                                                                                              i                                     >
56                                        CHAPTER                   I            GROUPS                                           7.     CATEGORIES: PRODUCTS, COPRODUCTS, AND FREE OBJECTS                     57



     The essential fact about a free object F is that in order to define a morphism with                            Hence {\p ° <p)/ = /l x = /. But \ F i = i. Thus by the uniqueness property of free ob-
domain F, it suffices to specify the image of the subset i{X) as is seen in the following                           jects we must have      ° <p = \ F A similar argument shows that <p o ^ = l^,. There-
                                                                                                                                                            .




examples.                                                                                                           fore F is equivalent to F'.


    EXAMPLES. Let G be any group and g e G. Then the map f :Z^> G defined                                                 Products, coproducts, and free objects are all defined via universal mapping proper-
by f{n) = g n is easily seen to be the unique homomorphism Z — G such that lh^            >                         ties (that is, in terms of the existence of certain uniquely determined morphisms).       We
Consequently, if X = 1 and
                        {       }   X —> Z is the inclusion map, then Z is free on X in
                                          /   :
                                                                                                                    have also seen that any two products (or coproducts) for a given family of objects are
                                         > G, let g =                                                               actually equivalent (Theorems 7.3 and 7.5). Likewise two free objects on the same set
the category of groups; (given /                       f{\) and define / as above). In
other words, to determine a unique homomorphism from Z to G we need only                                            are equivalent (Theorem 7.8). Furthermore there is a distinct similarity between the
specify the image of 1 e Z (that is, the image of i(X)). The (additive) group    of ra-                  Q          proofs of Theorems 7.3 and 7.8. Consequently it is not surprising that all of the no-
tional numbers does not have this property. It is not difficult to show that there is no                            tions just mentioned are in fact special cases of a single concept.

nontrivial homomorphism             Q — S Thus for any set X, function
                                          >           3.                                  i   :   X — Q and func-
                                                                                                     >


   f:X-+Sz with f(xi) ^ (1) for some ^e^, there is no homomorphism
tion
/:Q-+S with/i = /.
            3                                                                                                       Definition 7.9. An object I in a category C is said to be universal {or initial) // for
                                                                                                                    each object Co/C there exists one and only one morphism I — > C. An object T of C
                                                                                                                    is said to         be couniversal {or terminal) // for each object C of C there exists one and
                                                                                                                    only one morphism C            — T.
                                                                                                                                                    >
Theorem 7.8. If G is a concrete category, F and F' are objects of C such that F is
free on the set X and F' is free on the set X' and |X| = |X'|, then F is equivalent to F'.
                                                                                                                          We shall show below that products, coproducts, and free objects may be con-
                                                                                                                    sidered as (co)universal objects in suitably chosen categories. However, this char-
     Note that the hypotheses are satisfied when F and F' are both free on the same                                 acterization is not needed in the sequel. Since universal objects will not be mentioned
set Jf.                                                                                                             again (except in occasional exercises) until Sections III.4, III. 5, and IV.5, the reader
                                                                                                                    may wish to omit the following material for the present.
     PROOF OF 7.8. Since F, F' are free and \X\ = \X'\, there is a bijection
/ \X-+X' and maps /      X -> F and/ X' -> F'. Consider the map jf :X^>F'. Since
                            :                               :




F is free, there is a morphism <p F—> F' such that the diagram:
                                                  :
                                                                                                                    Theorem 7.10. Any two universal [resp. couniversal] objects in a category C are
                                                                                                                    equivalent.
                                                                        <P

                                                           F                     F'                                       PROOF. Let / and / be universal objects in C Since / is universal, there is a
                                                           t'                                                       unique morphism / :I-+J. Similarly, since J is universal, there is a unique morphism
                                                           X                                                        g :J — > /. The composition go f :/—>/isa morphism of
                                                                                                                          '




                                                                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                                                                   But 1 /:/—>/ is also a
                                                                        /                                           morphism of C. The universality of /implies that there is a unique morphism / —> /,
                                                                                                                    whence g ° f = 1/. Similarly the universality of / implies that fog= lj. Therefore
is commutative.    Similarly, since the bijection / has an inverse f~ l :X' -+X and F' is                           / / —> / is an equivalence. The proof for couniversal objects is analogous.
                                                                                                                      :



free, there is   a morphism ^         :   F' — > F such that:
                                                                                                                          EXAMPLE. The trivial group (e) is both universal and couniversal in the cate-
                                                                                                                    gory of groups.
                                                           F'                    *~F
                                                           \j                      b                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. Let F be a free object on the set (with / :X-+ F) in a concrete
                                                           X'                    +~X                                category e. Define a new category 3D as follows. The objects of 2D are all maps of sets
                                                                    r        1
                                                                                                                    / X —> A, where A is (the underlying set of) an object of C A morphism in 3D from
                                                                                                                      :




                                                                                                                    / :X — A to g :X —> B is defined to be a morphism h A — B of 6 such that the
                                                                                                                              >                                                      :       >

is   commutative. Combining these gives a commutative diagram:                                                      diagram:



                                                      F                            F
                                                      A-                          A'
                                                            /~ /= lx
                                                                1
                                    »                                                                                                                   .                                                                                 }                                                                                        G                                                                                        },.




58                                                                             CHAPTER                    I       GROUPS                                                                                                                                         8.       DIRECT PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS                                                                                                                   59



iscommutative (that is, hf = g). Verify that 1 A A -+ A is the identity morphism                                                        :                                                                              8.   Suppose X is a set and F is a free object on (with / : —> F) in the category of              X                               X
from /to / in 2D and that h is an equivalence in 2D if and only if h is an equivalence                                                                                                                                      groups (the existence of F is proved in Section 9). Prove that i(X) is a set of
in C. Since F is free on the set X, there is for each map / X —* A a unique mor-                                                                                            :                                               generators for the group F. [Hint: If G is the subgroup of F generated by i(X), then
phism f F—+ A such that // = /. This is precisely the statement that i :X—+ F
                        :                                                                                                                                                                                                   there is a homomorphism <p                                       :   F —* G such that <pi =                             /.   Show that F                  AG                           F is
is    a universal object in the category 2D.                                                                                                                                                                                the identity map.]


       EXAMPLE. Let {Ai                                      \
                                                                     i e   /}       be a family of objects in a category C. Define a
category £ whose objects are all pairs (B,{ j\                                                                        \
                                                                                                                              i e       /}),            where J? is an object of C and
for each /,/                 B — A, is a morphism of 6. A morphism in £ from (#,{ /
                                    :       >                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                   / e   /}) to        8.       DIRECT PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS
(D,{gi      |       /   e /}) is defined to be a morphism h B — D of C such that g» o                                 :                     >                                                 /z   = / for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In this section we study products in the category of groups and coproducts in the
every / e /. Verify that \ B is the identity morphism from (B, {/•}) to (B, {/ }) in 8 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       category of abelian groups. These products and coproducts are important not only
that /r is an equivalence in 8 if and only if h is an equivalence in C. If a product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as a means of constructing new groups from old, but also for describing the structure
exists in C for the family                                   {A       {    \
                                                                               iel] (with maps 7r*                                              :
                                                                                                                                                                    ~* ^* f° r eacn ^ £ ^)» tnen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of certain groups in terms of particular subgroups (whose structure, for instance,
for every (Z?,{ / }) in 8 there exists a unique morphism f :B —>                                                                                                                 JjA such that           7rt   o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /
= / for every / s /. But this says that (XI/M m                                                                                                                                                                        may already be known).
                                                                                                                                            / e     /}) is a couniversal object in the
category 8. Similarly the coproduct of a family of objects in (3 may be considered
                                                                                                                                    I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We begin by extending the definition of the direct product G X H of groups G
as a universal object in an appropriately constructed category.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and H (see page 26) to an arbitrary (possibly infinite) family of groups G s /)                                                                                   {           t   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Define a binary operation on the Cartesian product (of sets) JJ G as follows. If                                                                 t




       Since a product                          XlA °f a family Ai                           {        |
                                                                                                              /   e /} in a category                                            may be considered as a                 f,Z £ II °i ( that is, te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -   / -*    U Gi and /(/),#(/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e   G for each /), then fg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t                                                  :    / -»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U ft           is

couniversal object in a suitable category, it follows immediately from Theorem 7.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the function given by / —» f(i)g(i). Since each G is a group, f(i)g(i) e Gi for every /,          t
that                        is uniquely determined                                      up to equivalence. Analogous results hold for co-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       whence fg e JJ G by Introduction, Definition 5.1. If we identify /s JJ G with its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                                                                                                                                   t
products and free objects.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       image          {            (ai    = /(/) for each              / e   /) as is usually done in the case when / is finite, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the binary operation in JJ Gt is the familiar component -wise multiplication: { a                                                                                                     x }   {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bi
                                                                                        EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =    {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a i>i         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YL Gi> together with this binary operation, is called the direct product
1 .   A pointed set is a pair (S,x) with S a set and x e S. A morphism of pointed sets                                                                                                                                                             iel

      (S,x) — (S',x ) is a triple (/,*,*'), where / S —>£" is a function such that /(a:) = x'.
                            >
                                        f
                                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (or complete direct sum) of the family of groups                                                        {       t   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /   e /}. If /       =        {   1,2, ...,«}

      Show that pointed sets form a category.                                                                                                                                                                                   d         is      usually denoted Gi X                           G X 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X G„ (or in additive notation, Gi © G                                                                  2




2. If   / ^ — B is an equivalence in a category 6 and g :B —> A is the morphism
                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ©•••©G n                      ).


      such that g o f = \ Aj fo g = \ Bf show that g is unique.

3.    In the category g of groups, show that the group Gi X G 2 together with the
                                                                                        — Gi and                                                                                                                       Theorem 8.1. If {Gi                                    iel] is a family of groups, then
      homomorphisms ti                                   :   Gi X G 2                    >                            7r 2      :       Gi X                G — G (as in the Example
                                                                                                                                                                2       >        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \




      preceding Definition 2.2) is a product for                                                                          {   Gi,G 2                }                                                                           (i)       the direct product JJ Gi is a group;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is/
4.    In the category (3, of abelian groups, show that the group A x X A 2 together with                                                                                                 ,                                  (ii)          for each k s I, the map 7r k                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JJ Gi —* Gk given by f |— f(k) [or                                 {       ai}      H           ak] is an
      the homomorphisms ti                                            A — A X ^ and
                                                     ^ — A X ^ (as in the Example
                                                                 :         x        >    x            2                        t2       :           2       >       Y                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       epim orph ism of groups
      preceding Definition 2.2) is a coproduct for {A U A }.                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




5.    Every family \A {                          \
                                                     i   s /} in the category of sets has a coproduct.                                                                                   [Hint: consider                    PROOF. Exercise.
      U Ai =        :
                                {
                                    (a,z) e (   U A) X /                        |
                                                                                    a e A{       ]   with ^ t ->                                    U ^ given by a H («,/).
                                                                                                                                                            t                                            ^ is
                                                                                                                                                                                                           t


      called the disjoint union of the sets A im ]                                                                                                                                                                          The maps ir k in Theorem 8.1 are called the canonical projections of the direct
6.    (a)   Show that in the category S* of pointed sets (see Exercise 1) products always                                                                                                                              product.

      exist; describe them.
      (b)   Show that in S* every family of objects has a coproduct (often called a                                                                                                                                    Theorem 8.2. Let Oi\\z\\bea family of groups and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \                                                                             {   <fi   :   H — Gi e I a family
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i           }




      "wedge product"); describe this coproduct.                                                                                                                                                                       of group homomorphisms. Then there is a unique homomorphism (f                                                                             H — JJ Gi such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :                >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is/

7.    Let F be a free object on a set X(i :X—+ F) in a concrete category (3. If C con-                                                                                                                                 that irnf                  = <fi for all iel and this property determines JJ Gi uniquely up to isomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ie/
      tains an object whose underlying set has at least two elements in it, then / is an in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       phism. In other words, JJ Gi is a product in the category of groups.
      jective map of sets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                                                           a




60                                                                       CHAPTER                             I    GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                         8.           DIRECT PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS                                                                                                                                                                     61


      PROOF. By Introduction, Theorem 5.2, the map of sets <p                                                                                   :       H — H & g iven by
                                                                                                                                                                      >                                                                   it is           readily verified that \p is a homomorphism and that i/a; =                                                                                                                                                                                    for all / e /.           For

<p(a)    =       {    ipi(a)}i t i e       H     Gi is the unique function such that tt^ = & for all
                                                                                                                                                                          iel

                                                                                                                                                                                                 /       e /. It is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          each            {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a^ e                YA            i,           {        t }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =           Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              te/o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a(ai),                   h finite as above. If £                                                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y      Aj    — /?    >     is a    homomor-

easy to verify that v? is a homomorphism. Hence XI Gi is a product (in the categorical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          phism such that fi< =                                                              & for all                                                 /   then {({a,-)) = £(]T t t («)) =                                                                                        = X)
                                                                                                                        iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = 2-, <Kte) = ^GC                                                                                                   = ^({a<}); hence £ = ^ and ^ is unique. Therefore T] A
sense) and therefore determined up to isomorphism (equivalence) by Theorem 7.3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Io                                                          Io

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is      a coproduct in the category of abelian groups and hence is determined up to iso-
      Since the direct product of abelian groups is clearly abelian, it follows that the                                                                                                                                                 morphism (equivalence) by Theorem 7.5.
direct product of abelian groups is a product in the category of abelian groups also.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Next we investigate conditions under which a group G is isomorphic to the weak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          direct product of a family of its subgroups.

Definition 8.3. The (external) weak direct product of a family of groups                                                                                                                 {    Gi              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i       s 1}

denoted                            Gi, is the set of all f e YL Gi such that f(i) =                                                     ei,   the identity in Gi, for all
                      iel                                                                 iel                                                                                                                                            Theorem 8.6. Let Ni                                                      {                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i       e 1}                    be a family of normal subgroups of a group                                                                                          G such that
but a finite number of iel. If all the groups Gi are (additive) abelian,                                                                                                             Gi is usually
                                                                                                                                                                      iel                                                                             (i)     G = (U Ni>;
called the (external) direct sum and is denoted                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                       iel
                                                                                                                             Gi.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (ii)     for each k s I,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16/

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N D U Ni) = (e).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k                           (

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W
      If / is finite, the weak direct product coincides with the direct product. In any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Then G                = JJ Ni.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iel
case, we have

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Before proving the theorem we note a special case that is frequently used. Ob-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         serve that for normal subgroups Ni,N2                                                                                                                       ,   .    .     .       ,    N of a group G, (Ni U N U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UN)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r

Theorem 8.4. //{Gi                               |
                                                     i   e 1}           is       a family of groups, then                                                                                                                                 = NiN               2 -    •        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N = {nin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r                                     2 -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -n r            \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      me N] by an easily proved generalization of Theorem
        (i)
                               W
                YL Gi is a normal subgroup ofYL G*;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.3. In additive notation  NiN2      r is written      2 H    h Nr. It may be help-                                              -       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N                                          N+N
                 iel                                                                                        iel                                                                                                                          ful for the reader to  keep the following corollary in mind since the proof of the
      (ii)      for each k e I, the map i k                                      :   Gk —                         Gi g/pe/i 6y i k (a) =                    j   ai} is i, where ai                                            = e        general case is essentially the same.
                                                                                                        iel

for i ^ k and a k = a, is a monomorphism of groups;
      (iii)       for each iel, ii(Gi) /j a normal subgroup ofYL Gi.
                                                                                                                                  iel                                                                                                    Corollary 8.7. // Ni,N 2N are normal subgroups of a group G such that                            ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G = NiN -N and for each < k < N 2 -   (N r -N _iN k+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r -N = (e), then                                                            1                                  r,                 k (1                                       k               i-   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r)

      PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G = N] X N X X N                             2              •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r.




      The maps L k in Theorem 8.4 are called the canonical injections.                                                                                                                                                                               PROOF OF THEOREM 8.6. If {a                                                                                                                                  f }       e        IP^, then a = e for all but a finite       {


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         number of / e I. Let / be the finite set                                                                                                                {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ie I               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a,       ^ e\ Then YL ai is a well-defined ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ielo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ment of G, since for a e Ni and b e Nj, (i ^ j), ab = ba by Theorem 5.3(iv). Conse-
Theorem 8.5. Let                                Ai       i       s IJbe a family ofabelian groups (written additively). IfB is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         quently the map <p                                                       YL"^ ~^ G 8 iven b Y <*A h* II ^ £ G (and e}\-*e), is a homo-
                                            {        |




an abelian group and                                         :   Ai     —
                                                                       B iel] a family of homomorphisms, then there is a
                                                                             >
                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >                                f

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ielo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \




unique homomorphism \p                                   :       ]P Ai —> B such that \pa = \p\ for all i e I and this property                                                                                                          morphism such that ipa(ai) = ai for « s iV».                                                                                                                t

                                                                 iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Since G is generated by the subgroups                                                                                                                         N every element a of
determines                     ^ Ai
                               iel
                                          uniquely up to isomorphism. In other words, YL Ai is a coproduct in
                                                                                                                                               iel                                                                                       of elements from various                                                                                                 Since elements of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {,        a finite product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N and /V commute (for ^ « can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C7 is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /        y),
the category of abelian groups.                                                                                                                                                                                                          be written as a product YL a ^ where « t e                                                                                                                                N and / some finite subset of Hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {                       is                                                                 /.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         II          t.<fl,-) £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yl Ni and ^(11                                                                                                    = II <fa(ad = YL a = a Therefore, <p is an epi-                  *


      REMARK. The theorem is false if the word abelian is omitted. The external                                                                                                                                                          t£ ^o                                                                                     is/o                                                        teio                                           ielo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -




weak direct product is not a coproduct in the category of all groups (Exercise 4).                                                                                                                                                       morphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Suppose <p({ai}) = JI «                                                                                       t           = ^ s G. Clearly we may assume for convenience of no-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ielo
      PROOF OF 8.5. Throughout this proof all groups will be written additively. If                                                                                                                                                      tation that                                  h =                        1,2,             .       .   .       ,       n       j       .        Then JJ a = fllfl2                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                flfI       = ^ with ^ e N. Hence
     ^    e ^Ai, then only finitely many of the a are nonzero, say a ,a
             jfl,-J                                                            a                                              {                                             ix           lCL ,       .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,     ir .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {




Define ^ YL * — B by i£{ 0) = and i£({ a \ ) = frfa) + & (a ) +
                           :          :                             + & te )                                       x                                    2        i2              •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ar = a  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 -        •       -a n e Ni                          H ( (J M) = (^) and therefore ai = e. Repetition of this argu-
= XI ^t( <), where / is the set {/i,/             a* ^ 0J Since B is abelian,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i^\
                      fl              /V) =   e /                                         2,    .   .   .                    /                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ment shows that ai = e for all
                                                                                                                         {
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hence cp is a monomorphism.
                                                                                                                                    I




     iel a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e /.
                                                                                                                                                                     .




62                                                             CHAPTER                                       I     GROUPS                                                                                                                                        8.   DIRECT PRODUCTS AND DIRECT SUMS                                                                                                        63


     Theorem 8.6 motivates                                                                                                                                                                                         PROOF, (i) For each                                       /,       let   t   {   :    G -* Gi/Ni be the canonical epimorphism. By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Theorem 8.10, the map                                           H ^ II7                     G< ~* II                       GJN       is   an epimorphism with kernel

Definition 8.8. Let Ni           {           |
                                                     i   s 1}      be a family ofnormal subgroups ofa group                                                               G such that                       II Ni. Therefore II^/Hm ^ Yld/Ni by the First Isomorphism Theorem, (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            iel
G = (U Ni) and for each k e N k D                           I,                                  ( (J Ni)
                                                                                                         = (e). Then                                      G is said to be the internal                      is    similar.
            iel                                                                                  i-^k
weak direct product of the family                                      {   Ni              |
                                                                                               i s 1 1            {or the internal direct sum ifG is (additive)
abelian).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXERCISES
    As an easy corollary of Theorem 8.6 we have the following characterization of
internal weak direct products.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 .    5 is not the direct product of any family of its proper subgroups. The same is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    true of             Zpn (p prime, n > 1) and Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.     Give an example of groups                                               Hu Kj such that H X H ^K X K and no Hi           X                2            X         2                       is
Theorem 8.9. Let Ni          {       |
                                             i       e 1}       be a family of normal subgroups Of a group G.                                                                                 G   is the            isomorphic to any Kim
internal weak direct product of the family {Ni                                                                        |
                                                                                                                          i   e 1}           if and only if every nonidentity
element of  G is a unique product a^a^- -ai n with                                                   •
                                                                                                                               ii,   .       .   .   ,   indistinct elements of I and
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3.     Let G be an (additive) abelian group with subgroups H and K. Show that
e ^ ai k e N for each k = 1,2,
                    ik               n.                            .   .   .       ,                                                                                                                               G=          H@
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K if and only if there are homomorphisms H±=>Gt^K such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ti    it

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ttui = 1//, 7T i2 = 1*, 7TH =   and 7r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2   = 0, where is the map sending every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                                      2 *i
     PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                              element onto the zero (identity) element, and litt^x) + tt2(x) = x for all xeG.                                                                    l2



                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.     Give an example to show that the weak direct product is not a coproduct in the
    There is a distinction between internal and external weak direct products. If a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   category of all groups. (Hint:                                                                suffices to consider the case                                  of two factors
group G is the internal weak direct product of groups Nt, then by definition each TV,                                                                                                                                                                                                                   it


is actually a subgroup of G and G is isomorphic to the external weak direct product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G X H.)
H
id
    w
      jV/. However, the external weak direct product
                                                        W
                                                          N/ does not actually contain                                               H
                                                                                                                                     hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5.     Let G,           H be finite cyclic groups. Then G X //is cyclic                                                                       if      and only if (\G\,\H\) = 1.
the groups M, but only isomorphic copies of them (namely the ii(Ni)                                                                                                                — see Theorem            6. Every finitely generated abelian group G ^ (e) in which every element (except e)
8.4 and Exercise 10). Practically speaking, this distinction is not very important and                                                                                                                         has order p (p prime) is isomorphic to Zp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p ©•         (n summands) for                                           ©Z                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -®ZP
the adjectives "internal" and "external" will be omitted whenever no confusion is                                                                                                                                  some n > 1. [Hint: Let A = {a u                                                           .   .   .        an       be a set of generators such that no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,        ]

possible. In fact we shall use the following notation.                                                                                                                                                             proper subset of A generates G. Show that (a { )                                                                         ^ Z and G = {a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      p                         Y)       X (a ) X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X (On).]
     NOTATION. We write G = JJ* Ni to indicate that the group G is the internal
                                                                               id                                                                                                                           7.     Let H,K,N be nontrivial normal subgroups of a group G and suppose
weak direct product of the family of its subgroups                                                                                   {
                                                                                                                                             N,      |
                                                                                                                                                         / £   /}                                                  G = H X K. Prove that jV is in the center of G or jV intersects one of H,K non-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   trivially. Give examples to show that both possibilities can actually occur when

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G is nonabelian.
Theorem 8.10. Let {U Gi — Hi                                   »                               £ Ij              be a family of homomorphisms of groups
and let f = JJYi be the map II Gi —
                                         :                                     |
                                                                                       i



                                                                                           H             Hi, given by                    J
                                                                                                                                             ai j        H     {   fi(aO   j   .   Then f is a homo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                            8.     Corollary 8.7 is false if one of the                                                          N       is     not normal.
                                                         iel                                   iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   If a group                    G is the (internal) direct product of its subgroups H,K, then H^ G/K
morphism of groups such that f(Y[™ Gi)                                                                           c II W Hi, Ker f = H Ker                                              fi    and Im f
                                                                                                                                                                                                            9.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   and G/H                      = K.
                                                                           iel                                      id                                                   ill
= JI Im fi. Consequently f is a monomorphism [resp. epimorphism] if and only if each
     id                                                                                                                                                                                                    10. If { G<          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i       e / J is a family of groups, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YL" G is the internal weak direct product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i


fi is.                                                                                                                                                                                                             its       subgroups                      {    {Gi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            iel}.

                                                                                                                                                                                                           11.     Let {Ni              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                iel] be a family of subgroups of a group G. Then G is the internal
     PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                              weak direct product of Ni                                                i            = a jai for all / ^ j and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e 1} if and only if: (i) ai a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             {          \

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ai £      N a, N,;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i9               £                                   element of G is uniquely a product a n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (ii) every nonidentity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a in                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
Corollary 8.11. Let {Gi                                                and Ni                                             be families ofgroups such that Ni is a
                                                 |
                                                     i £ Ij                            {                 |
                                                                                                             i £ Ij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   where i u                .   .   .   ,   in are distinct elements of / and e ^ a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ik e ik for each k. [Compare                                  N
normal subgroup of Gi for each iel.                                                                                                                                                                                Theorem 8.9.]
     (i)     II Ni is a normal subgroup of YL Gi and Jl Gi/JJ Ni                                                                                                         ^ YL Gi/Ni.                       12.     A normal subgroup Hoi a group G is said to be a direct factor (direct summand if
                                                     W     w                                                                                                                                                       G is additive abelian) if there exists a (normal) subgroup K of G such that
     (ii)
             LT N w a normal subgroup ofJY" Gi and ]J Gi/JJ N*^ II" Gi/Ni.
              izl
                         i

                                                                                                         iel                             iel                       iel                 iel                         G = H X K.
                                                                                                                                       .




64                                                                                                   CHAPTER                       I       GROUPS                                                                                                                                                          9.       FREE GROUPS, FREE PRODUCTS, GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                                                                                                                               65


         (a) If                      H            is a      direct factor of                                   K and A' is a direct factor of G, then J7is normal                                                                                                                   Unfortunately the word on the right side of the equation may not be reduced (for
       in G.             [Compare Exercise 5.10.]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   example, if xm Xm = yr Sl ). Therefore, we define the product to be given by juxtaposi-
         (b) If                      H            is a direct factor of G, then every                                                             homomorphism H —> G may be ex-                                                                                                    tion and (if necessary) cancellation of adjacent terms of the form xx~ l or x~ x; for                                                                                                                    l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "
       tended to an endomorphism G — > G. However, a monomorphism //—> G need                                                                                                                                                                                                       example (xi x 2 X3 1 Xxz~ x 2  = xiW. More precisely, if*i Xl *TO x ™and y^- -y n 8 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                1                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W)                                                                                      -   •                         •




       not be extendible to an automorphism G —> G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 are nonempty reduced words on X with m < n,                                                                                                             let       k be the                     largest   integer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0 < k < m) such that * x ™:j = y- £\ for j = 0,1,                                                                                                          k - 1. Then define
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G — JJ G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .       .

                                                            be a family of groups and J CZ I. The map <*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,

13.    Let           {
                         G   t       |
                                             / e   /}                                                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   >           t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .v         \m-k y}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -yJ n if k < m\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        v, ^1.                                                       k+l
       given by           where bj = <2, for ye/ and b { = ^ (identity of G,) for / ^ 7,
                                                       H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Al            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           X   m-k       Sk+1                                  •
                                         {
                                             a, }                   {
                                                                                    ,



       is a monomorphism of groups and       G -/a(H G )             G                                                                        t                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                      =                                           t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ui Xl        -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •'m+1                      sn                       if        k = m < n;
                                                             ill — J
                                         teJ      jeJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     if       k = m                             n.

14.    For / = 1,2 let // < G and give examples to show that each of the following
                                                                        t                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ifm > n, the product is defined analogously. The definition insures that the product
       statements may be false: (a) Gi          G 2 and Hi    2 => G /H     G 2///2                                                ^                                           =H                                                         x               x   ^                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of reduced words is a reduced word.
       (b) Gi            ^
                G 2 and G1///1  G 2 ///2 =* //1    //2 (c) //2 and Gi/M     G 2 /7/2        ^                                              ^              .                   H^  x                                                                           ^
             G,          ^G                   2.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theo re m 9. 1 If X is a nonempty set and F = F(X) is the set of all reduced words on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X, then F is a group under the binary operation defined above and F = (X).
9.    FREE GROUPS, FREE PRODUCTS, AND GENERATORS AND
      RELATIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The group F = F(X) is called the free group on the set X. (The terminology "free"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is        explained by Theorem 9.2 below.)
      We     shall show that free objects (free groups) exist in the (concrete) category of
groups, and we shall use these to develop a method of describing groups in terms of
"generators and relations." In addition, we indicate how to construct coproducts                                                                                                                                                                                                              SKETCH OF PROOF OF 9.1. Since                                                                               1   is   an identity element and x^-                                               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     jc>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~s
(free products) in the category of groups.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         has inverse x~ dn                                          •   •   •   x   x        \ we need only verify associativity. This may be done by in-

   Given a set X we shall construct a group F that is free on the set X in the sense of                                                                                                                                                                                            duction and a tedious examination of cases or by the following more elegant device.
Definition 7.7. If* = 0, Fis the trivial group (e). IfX^ 0, let A^ be a set disjoint                                                                                                                                                  1                                            For each x e X and 8 = ±1 let |jc 5 be the map                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F— F given by                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H> x and
from X such that \X\ = \X~ Choose a bijection X-^X' and denote the image of
xeXby x~ Finally choose a set that is disjoint from X U X~ and has exactly one
                             l
                                 .
                                                                                        l
                                                                                            \.
                                                                                                                                                                                      1



                                                                                                                                                                                                               l                                                                                                      ,il... v 8nUl X             ~   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W -"^'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     if       X**X{-**\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     if       jc*=jcr*(=                                           if«= i).
element; denote this element by 1. A word on X is a sequence (a u a 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                            .) with a e                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t


X U X~ U {1} such that for some n e N*, a k =
                 l
                                                                                                                                                                          1   for all                          k> n. The constant                                                  Since \x\\x~ = \ F = \x~ \\x\, every |.v is a permutation (bijection) of F (with in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |




sequence (1,1,                   empty word and is denoted 1. (This ambiguous
                                              .    .   .)       is          called the                                                                                                                                                                                             verse |*- 5 |) by (13) of Introduction, Section 3. Let A(F) be the group of all permuta-
notation will cause no confusion.) A word (a l9 a 2 .) on X is said to be reduced                                                                             ,   .   .                                                                                                            tions of F (see page 26) and F the subgroup generated by {\x\\x eX}. The map
provided that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <p F —> F given by 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :                           If and x^- -x n 6n H> \x^\               h 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |;t n "| is clearly a surjection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •                                       •       •   •




       (i)   for all x eX, x and x~ l are not adjacent (that is, a,                                                                                                                                           = x => a i+                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5*   x~ and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   such that <£>(h>ih> 2 ) = <£>(h>i)<£>(h> 2 ) for all w{ e F. Since 1 f-> xi Sl    -x n 8n under the map                                                                     -   •




cii   = x~ => a i+ y£ x for all s N*, x s X) and
             l
                                              i                                                  /                                                                                                                                                                                             •       •   •   \x n 6n \,            it       follows that <p is injective. The fact that F                                                                is a            group implies that
       (ii) a k = 1 implies a, = 1 for all / > A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   associativity holds in                                                         F and that <p is an isomorphism of groups. Obviously
In particular, the empty word 1 is reduced.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        f=(x).                            m
    Every nonempty reduced word is of the form (xi Xl ,x 2 Xz    x n Xn ,l,l, .), where                                                                                               ,   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .   .




n e N*, Xi sXand X    =  ±1 (and by convention x denotes x for all x zX). Hereafter
                                                            -

                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Certain properties of free groups are easily derived. For instance if \X\ > 2,
we shall denote this word by x kx x2k2 xnx\ This new notation is both more tractable             x
                                                                                                           •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   then the free group on         X is nonabelian (x,y zX and x ^ y => x~ y~ xy is reduced                                                                                                     l   l



and more suggestive. Observe that the definition of equality of sequences shows that                                                                                                                                                                                               ==>       x~ y~ xy 9± 1 => xy ^ yx). Similarly every element (except 1) in a free group has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l           l



                          •* x *andj>i      y n 6n (x^y, eX; \,8j = ±1) are equal if and                                                                                                                                                                                           infinite order (Exercise 1). If X = {a}, then the free group on X is the infinite cyclic
                                                                                                                    41 -
two reduced words jci Xi                                                    •   •
                                                                                        TO
                                                                                                                           •




only if both are 1 or m = n and Xi =  y\, \ =      for each =    ,2,   n. Consequently                                         -

                                                                                                                               t           <5 t                               /               1                    .   ....   ,                                                    group (a) (Exercise 2). A decidedly nontrivial fact is that every subgroup of a free
the map from X into the set F(X) of all reduced words on X given by x |— x = x is in-                                                                                                                                                                                              group is itself a free group on some set (see J. Rotman [19]).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              >



jective.We shall identify X with its image and consider A' to be a subset of F(X).
    Next we define a binary operation on the set F = F(X) of all reduced words on A\
The empty word 1 is to act as an identity element (wl = lw = w for all w s F). In-                                                                                                                                                                                                 Theorem 9.2. Let F be the free group on a set X and l :X—>F the inclusion map. IfG
formally, we would like to have the product of nonempty reduced words to be given                                                                                                                                                                                                  is a group and f X — G a map of sets, then there exists a unique homomorphism of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :               >
by juxtaposition, that is,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         groups f                    :   F — G such that fi = f. In other words, F is a free object on the set X in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >


                                                   (a-/ 1       -       •
                                                                            'Xm Xm )(yi Sl             -   •
                                                                                                               -yJ n ) = *i Xl                    -       •
                                                                                                                                                                  -.O^i 51                    -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -yJ n           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   category of groups.
66                                                                CHAPTER                     I       GROUPS                                                                                                      9.    FREE GROUPS, FREE PRODUCTS, GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                                                           67


            REMARK. If F' is another free object on the set X in the category of groups (with                                                                                                         Definition 9.4. Let Xbea set andY a set of (reduced) words on X. A group                                             G    is said
X       :   X — F'\ then Theorems 7.8 and 9.2 imply that there is an isomorphism :F^ F'
                            »                                                                                                                                                        <p               to be the group defined by the generators x e                           X and relations w = e (w e Y) provided
such that <pi = X. In particular \(X) is a set of generators of F'\ this fact may also be                                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                      G F/N, where F is the free group on X and N the normal subgroup of IF generated
proved directly from the definition of a free object.                                                                                                                                                 by Y. One says that (X Y) is a presentation of G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |




            SKETCH OF PROOF OF 9.2. Define /(l) = e and if jci*                                                                                   1 -   •   -x n dn is a nonempty
                                                                                                                                                                                                              The preceding discussion shows that the group defined by given generators and
reduced word on X, define f(x^- -* n *») = f(xi) 8lf(x 2 y*- f(x n ) bn Since G is a
                                                                                  •                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      relations always exists.               Furthermore it is the largest possible such group in the
group and 5< = ±1, the product f(xi) Sl  f(x n ) 6n is a well-defined element of G.           -   •   •

                                                                                                                                                                                                      following sense.
Verify that / is a homomorphism such that ft = /. If g                F —* G is any homomor-                                          :



phism such that gi     = f  then g(x^-            =  g(*i  )-     -g(xn n ) = #(*i)   •-g«) 6n                       51       •
                                                                                                                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                                                                                         -   •




 = gt(xi)  -gt(x n ) 5n = fixiY    f(x n ) hn = f(xi
                                Sl -   •                  -x n 5n ). Therefore /is unique.
                                                              1   -   •   •
                                                                                                          Bl -   •




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Theorem 9.5. (Van Dyck) Let Xbea set, Y a set of (reduced) words on X and the                                              G
Corollary 9.3. Every group                                    G       /j //z£         homomorphic image of a free group.                                                                             group defined by the generators x s X and relations w = e (w e Y). //H is any group
                                                                                                                                                                                                     such that          H = (X) and H satisfies all the relations w = e (w e Y), then there is an
    PROOF. Let A' be a set of generators of G and let F be the free group on the set                                                                                                                 epimorphism          G — H.*


X. By Theorem 9.2 the inclusion map X —> G induces a homomorphism f F —> G                                                                                                                       :




such that x \-> x e G. Since G = (A ), the proof of Theorem 9.2 shows that /is an
                                                                              r

                                                                                                                                                                                                              REMARK. The elements of Y are being interpreted as words on X, products in
epimorphism.                                                                                                                                                                                         G, and products in              H as the context indicates.
    An immediate consequence of Corollary 9.3 and the First Isomorphism Theorem                                                                                                                               PROOF OF 9.5. If F is the free group on X then the inclusion map X -* H in-
is thatany group G is isomorphic to a quotient group F/N, where G = (X), Fis the                                                                                                                     duces an epimorphism <p                 :   F —> H by Corollary 9.3. Since H satisfies the relations
free group on X and N is the kernel of the epimorphism F —* G of Corollary 9.3.                                                                                                                      w = e (w s Y), Y CZ Ker <p. Consequently, the normal subgroup N generated by Y 'm
Therefore, in order to describe G up to isomorphism we need only specify X, F, and                                                                                                                   F is contained in Ker <p. By Corollary 5.8 induces an epimorphism F/N —* H/0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        </?


N. But F is determined up to isomorphism by ^ (Theorem 7.8) and N is determined                                                                                                                      Therefore the composition G      F/N H/0      ^            —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is an epimorphism.             ^H
by any subset that generates it as a subgroup of F. Now if w = xi            x n 5n e F is a                                                                   Sl •         •   •




generator of N, then under the epimorphism F— » G, h>|— >*i               -x n     = es G.                                                                   Sl -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                     671

                                                                                                                                                                                                         The following examples of groups defined by generators and relations illustrate
The equation xi     -x n 5n = e in G is called a relation on the generators x Clearly a
                                           6l «   •
                                                                                                                                                                                    {.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     the sort of ad hoc arguments that are often the only way of investigating a given pre-
given group G may be completely described by specifying a set X of generators of G
                                                                                                                                                                                                     sentation.         When convenient, we shall use exponential notation for words (for ex-
and a suitable set of relations on these generators. This description is not unique
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ample, x 2y~ 3 in place of x 1 ^ 1 ^ -1^ -1^ -1 )-
since there are many possible choices of both X and R for a given group G (see
Exercises 6 and 9).
            Conversely, suppose we are given a set                                                    X and a set Y of (reduced) words on the                                                              EXAMPLE. Let G be the group defined by generators a,b and relations a 4 = e,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a 2 b~ 2 = e and abab~ l = e. Since Q 8 the quaternion group of order 8, is generated by
elements oiX. Question: does there exist a group G such that G is generated by^and                                                                                                                                                                      ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                     elements a,b satisfying these relations (Exercise 4.14), there                                               an epimorphism
all the relations w = e(w eY) are valid (where w =                  x n bn now denotes a product                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is

in G)? We shall see that the answer is yes, providing one allows for the possibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (P   .   G        Q by Theorem 9.5. Hence G\ > \Q = 8. Let F be the free group on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s                                   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a,b]

that in the group G the elements of ^ may not all be distinct. For instance, if a,b eX
                                                                                                                                                                                                     and      N the normal subgroup generated by a\a b~ ,abab-      j            show2   2   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 } .   It is not difficult to
                                                                                                                                                                                                     that every element of F/N is of the form a^Wwith       < < 3 and j = 0,1, whence
and a b~ is a (reduced) word in Y, then any group containing a,b and satisfying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /'
                        l        l


                                                                                                                                                                                                     \G\ = \F/N\ < 8. Therefore \G\ = 8 and <p is an isomorphism. Thus the group de-
a b~ = e must have a = b.
    l           l


                                                                                                                                                                                                     fined by the given generators and relations is (isomorphic to)
    Given a set of "generators" X and a set Y of (reduced) words on the elements ofX.                                                                                                                                                                               Qs                                        .




we construct such a group as follows. Let F be the free group onAfand TV the normal
subgroup of F generated by Y. 3 Let G be the quotient group F/N and identify^ with                                                                                                                         EXAMPLE. The group defined by the generators a,b and the relations a n = e
its image in F/N under the map X CZ F— F/N; as noted above, this may involve                                                                                                                              < n £ N*), b = e and abab = e (or ba = a~ b) is the dihedral group Dn (Exercise 8).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (3                                                                  l



identifying some elements of A' with one another. Then G is a group generated by X
(subject to identifications) and by construction all the relations w = e (w e Y) are                                                                                                                          EXAMPLE. The group defined by one generator b and the single relation
satisfied     (w = xi Sl 'Xn 5 " e Y => x^- -x n 6 " £ N =* a:i 6i A^- -xi^N = N; that is,
                                                      -   •                               •                                               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                     b m = e (m £ N*) is            Zm (Exercise 9).
       -x n dn = e in G = F/N).
                    •




                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. The free group F on a set X is the group defined by the generators
            3
                The normal subgroup generated by a set 5 c F is the intersection of all normal subgroups                                                                                             xeX and no relations (recall that (0) = (e) by Definition 2.7). The terminology
of F that contain 5; see Exercise 5.2.                                                                                                                                                               "free" arises from the fact that F is relation-free.
68                                                                                              CHAPTER                             I   GROUPS                                                                                                            9.       FREE GROUPS, FREE PRODUCTS, GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                         69


      We close this section with a brief discussion of coproducts (free products) in the                                                                                                                                                          5.   The group defined by generators a,b and relations a 8 = b2a 4 = ab~ ab = e has   l


category of groups. Most of the details are left to the reader since the process is quite                                                                                                                                                              order at most 16.
similar to the construction of free groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The cyclic group of order 6 is the group defined by generators a,b and relations
      Given a family of groups           we may assume (by relabeling if necessary)         {   d   :
                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                    i   e /}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a 2 = b* = ar l b~ l ab = e.
that the d are mutually disjoint sets. LetX = \J d and let 1 be a one-element set                                                                                                      {   }


                                                                                                                                                    ie/

disjoint fromZ.  A word on X is any sequence (a u a                                                                                                                         .)   such that ciieX U                              1 j     and       7.   Show that the group defined by generators a,b and relations a 2 = e, b 3 = e is in-
                                                                                                                                                               2,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       finite and nonabelian.
for some n e N*, a* =  for all > n. A word {a\,a                 1                              i                                                              2,   .   .   .) is      reduced provided:
          (i) no cii eX is the identity element in its group Gf,                                                                                                                                                                                  8.   The group defined by generators a,b and relations a n = e (3 < n e N*), b 2 = e
          (ii) for all i,j > 1, en and a i+ are not in the same group Gf,                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and abab = e is the dihedral group D n [See Theorem 6.13.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .


           = 1 implies a = 1 for all > k.
          (iii) a k                                                          {                                              /


In particular 1 = (1,1,   .) is reduced. Every reduced word (?M) may be written
                                                                     .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9.   The group defined by the generator b and the relation b m = e (m e N*) is the
uniquely as a\a   -a n = {a\,a         a n ,l,l,
                                       2
                                           -   •
                                                    .), where a eX.                       2,    .    .          .
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                        .       .                                {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cyclic group            Zm   .




   Let JJ*G (or Gi * G 2 *      * G n if / is finite) be the set of all reduced words onX.
                                                                                      •
                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.   The operation of free product is commutative and associative: for any groups
                 16/

JJ*G       t    forms a group, called the free product of the family                                                                                                                       (    d   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                        i   e /},       under the                      A,B,C, A * B            ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B * A and A * (B * C) (A * B) * C. ^
binary operation defined as follows. 1 is the identity element and the product of two                                                                                                                                                            11. If   N        \s   the normal subgroup of A *B generated by A, then (A * B)/N^B.

reduced words (5^ 1) essentially is to be given by juxtaposition. Since the juxtaposed                                                                                                                                                           12. If   G and H each have more than one element, then G * H is an infinite group
product of two reduced words may not be reduced, one must make the necessary                                                                                                                                                                           with center (e).
cancellations and contractions. For example, if aijbi £ G* for / = 1,2,3, then
(a^asXas-^bibs) = aic 2 bibz = (a u c 2 AAAA,      where c 2 = a 2 b 2 eG 2 Finally,                                                                .    .                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13.   A free group is a free product of infinite cyclic groups.
for each k e /the map i k G k — TL* G given by e\-> 1 and a\-> a = (a, 1,1,    .) is a
                                                                                 :


                                                                                                        16/
                                                                                                                                i                                                                                           .       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14. If   G is the group defined by generators a,b and relations a 2 = e, b = e, then   z



monomorphism of groups. Consequently, we sometimes identify G k with its iso-                                                                                                                                                                          G =Z *Z      2     3.   [See Exercise 12 and compare Exercise 6.]

morphic image in                                       H*^ (for example Exercise                                                                             15).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15. If   /    :   Gi — > G 2 and g \Hi-*H2 are homomorphisms of groups, then there is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       unique homomorphism h : Gi * i/i — > G 2 * #2 such that A           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gi = /and h\Hx = g.


Theorem 9.6. Let {Gi         be a family of groups and II*Gi their free product. If
                                                                         |
                                                                                 i   e 1}
                                                          hi
    Gi:
                 —H
            i s 1} is a family of group homomorphisms, then there exists a unique
                                   |




homomorphism xp II*Gi —>       such that ypa = \pifor all iel and this property deter-
                                                   :                                      H
                                                       16/

mines II*Gi uniquely up to isomorphism. In other words, Jj[*Gi is acoproduct in the
               re/                                                                                                                                                                   ie/

category of groups.


      SKETCH OF PROOF. If a&                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                        -   •
                                                                                                                                -a n is a reduced word in II*G\ with a k e                                                              d   k,


define \p(ai           •   •   •«„) to be                                ^taW^fe)                                       •   •
                                                                                                                                '^i n   M           e    H-



                                                                                                                EXERCISES
 1.    Every nonidentity element in a free group F has infinite order.

 2.   Show that the free group on the set {a                                                                                                j       is       an infinite cyclic group, and hence
       isomorphic to Z.

 3.   Let F be a free group and let                                                                      N be the subgroup generated by the set x n x                                                               (           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e F,

      n a fixed integer}                                     .    Show that N <\ F.
 4.   Let F be the free group on the set X, and let Y X. If                                                                                                     d                      H   is   the smallest normal
      subgroup of F containing Y, then F/H is a free group.
                                                         1                                                                                         «




                                                                                                                                                       1.        FREE ABELIAN GROUPS                                                              71


                                                                                                                                    GXH                                                                        G@H
                                                                                                                                    HVw K                                                                      H+K
                                                                                                                                    U     Gi                                                               £g,
                                                                                                                                    weak direct product                                                    direct sum

                                                                                                For any group G in additive notation, (m + n)a = ma + na(ae G; m,n e Z). If
                                   CHAPTER           1
                                                                                            the group is abelian, then m(a   b) = ma     mb. If                  +
                                                                                                                                                  is a nonempty subset of G,      +            *
                                                                                            then by Theorem 1.2.8 the subgroup (*) generated by .Yin additive notation consists
                                                                                            of all linear combinations mxi                                   +nx H    2   2       h n k x k (n t e Z, x { eX). In particular, the
                                                                                            cyclic group (x) is {nx                           n e Z}
                   THE STRUCTURE                                                                A basis of an abelian group F is a subset X of F such that (i) F = (X); and (ii) for
                                                                                            distinct   x u x2   ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                          \




                                                                                                                                    x k £ X and rii e Z,
                                                                                                                                                             .




                     OF GROUPS                                                                                      mxi + /i2* 2 H                                   h n kx k =       =>     m=                for every /.

                                                                                            The reader should not be misled by the tempting analogy with bases of vector spaces
                                                                                            (Exercise 2).




                                                                                            Theorem 1.1. The following conditions on an abelian group F are equivalent.
                                                                                                 (i)  F has a nonempty basis.
We continue our study of groups according to the plan outlined in the introduction
                                                                                                (ii)  F is the {internal) direct sum of a family of infinite cyclic subgroups.
of Chapter I. The chief emphasis will be on obtaining structure theorems of some
                                                                                                (iii) F is {isomorphic to) a direct sum of copies of the additive group Z
depth for certain classes of abelian groups and for various classes of (possibly non-                                                                                      of integers.
abelian) groups that share     some desirable properties with abelian groups. The
                                                                                                (iv) There exists a nonempty set X and a function           X — F with the following               i   :           >


chapter has three main divisions which are essentially independent of one another,
                                                                                            property: given an abelian group                                 G and function f X — G, there exists a unique homo-
                                                                                                                                                                                       :       >


except that results from one may be used as examples or motivation in the others.
                                                                                            morphism ofgroups f F       G such that ft = f. In other words, F is a free object in the
                                                                                                                                      :



                                                                                            category of abelian groups.
The interdependence of the sections is as follows.

                               1            3                4
                                                                                                An abelian group F that satisfies the conditions of Theorem 1.1 is called a free
                                                                                            abelian group (on the set X). By definition the trivial group                                                       is the free abelian        group
                               \                             \
                               2                             5
                                                                                            on the null set 0.

                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.1. (i) => (ii) If X is a basis of F, then for each
                                                                                            x s X, nx = if and only if n = 0. Hence each subgroup (x) (x eX) is infinite cyclic
Most of Section 8 is independent of the rest of the chapter.                                (and normal since F is abelian). Since F = (X), we also have F =
                                                                                                                                                             (\J (x)). If for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x*X
                                                                                            some z s X, (z) D (U (x)) ^ 0, then for some nonzero neZ,nz = mx H                                                                Y            h n kx k
                                                                                                                                 xzX

1.   FREE ABELIAN GROUPS                                                                    with z,*i,                          distinct elements of*, which contradicts the fact that                                            X is a basis.
                                                                                            Therefore (z)           D <(J (*)) =                             and hence F =                  (x) by Definition 1.8.8.
     We shall investigate free objects in the category of abelian groups. As is the usual                                                                                             xtX
custom when dealing with abelian groups additive notation is used throughout this
                                                                                                (ii) => (iii)Theorems 1.3.2, 1.8.6, and 1.8.10.
section. The following dictionary may be helpful.
                                                                                               (iii) => (i) Suppose F                     ^
                                                                                                                        ]T z and the copies of Z are indexed by a set*. For each
                    ab                                           a   +b                     x £ X, let dx be the element                       {       t }   of   ^Z, where u =   for  ^ x, and ux = Verify
                                                                                                                                                                                       {                   /                         1 .

                    a" 1
                    e
                                                                 —a                         that {0x 1*6*}
                                                                                            basis of F.
                                                                                                                        is a basis of ]jT                     Z and use the isomorphism F ^     Z to obtain a          ^
                    an                                           na                            (i) => (iv) Let              *
                                                                                                               be a basis of F and t :X—+F the inclusion map. Suppose we are
                    ab'    1
                                                                 a — b                      given a map /:*-> G. If « £ F, then « =       H      [-/!*** („, e Z; *t £*) since*
                    HK                                           //+ K
                    aH                                           a+ H                       generates F. If u = mix Y H                                          h            (/w^ £ Z),    then J] («< -              w )* = 0, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t   t




                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x




72                                                      CHAPTER                         II       THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                        1.           FREE ABELIAN GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                 73



m = rm for every                                    /       since      X is a basis. Consequently the map / F'— G, given by                           :               »                                              Proposition 1.3. Let Fi be the free abelian group on the set Xi and¥ 2 the free abelian

                                                            = ni f( Xl ) ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     group on the set X 2 Then F   F 2 if and only ifF x and F 2 have the same rank {that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                        Y   ^
/(") =                                  rllX
                                               ^j                                                            ^                     is   a well-defined function such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |Xi|   = |X                2 |).



f = f Since G is abelian / is easily seen to be a homomorphism. Since X generates
 L


F, any homomorphism F— » G is completely detemined by its action on A\ Thus                                                                                                                                             REMARK. Proposition 1.3 is also true for arbitrary nonabelian free groups (as
if g  F —* G is a homomorphism such that #i = /, then for any x eX g(x) = g(i(x))
          :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in Section 1.9); see Exercise 12.

 = f( x ) = f(x), whence g = f and / is unique. Therefore, by Definition 1.7.7 F is
a free object on the set                                      X in the category of abelian groups.                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.3. If a                                                                                                                                      :       Fi   ^ F then a(X,)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2,                          is           a basis of F2                                            ,


                Given t A'— F, construct the direct sum}] Z with the copies of Z
         (iv) => (iii).                                            :           >                                                                                                                                    whence |A\| = |a(A' )| = 1^1 by Theorem 1.2. The converse is Theorem 1.7.8.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ]




indexed byA\ Let Y = {6 X xeX\ be a basis of J] z as m tne proof of (iii) => (i).
                                                                           \




The proof of (iii) ==> (i) ==> (iv) shows that 2] Z is a free object on the set Y. Since we
clearly have \X\ = Y\, F          ]T z b y Theorem 1.7.8.
                                                        |
                                                                       ^                                                                                                                                         Theorem 1.4. Every abelian group        is the homomorphic image of a free abelian                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 group of rank |X|, where X is a set of generators of G.
         Given any set A', the proof of Theorem 1.1 indicates how to construct a free
abelian group F with basis X. Simply let F be the direct sum^Z, with the copies of Z
indexed by X. As in the proof of (iii) => (i), {d x \x eX} is a basis of F = ^Z, and F is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF. Let F be the free abelian group on the set X. Then F =                                                                                                                                                          ^ Zx and rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               xsX
free on the set \6 X                                    \
                                                            x zX\      .       Since the map i                             :   X — F given by x h ^ is injective
                                                                                                                                        *                                                                  it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F= \X\. By Theorem 1.1 the inclusion map X —> G induces a homomorphism
follows easily that F is free on                                                     X in the sense of condition (iv) of Theorem                                                    1 . 1 .      In this        / '-F-* G such that lxH * s G, whence X CZ Im /. Since A' generates G we must
                                                                                                                                                                                                                have Im f = G.
situation we shall identify                                            X with its image under   so that A" CZ Fand the cyclic sub-  i


group (8 X ) =                      {   n6x     |
                                                        n e Z)         = Z6 X is written (x) = Zx. In this notation F =     (0*) is                                                   ^                             We now prove a theorem that will be extremely useful in analyzing the structure
written F =                                 Zx» and a typical element of F has the form mxi                                                                                -\
                                                                                                                                                                                                     h n kx k   of finitely generated abelian groups (Section 2). We shall need

(n x s Z, x t £ A'). In particular, A"                                                       = l(X) is a basis of F.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lemma 1.5. If{\ u                                                      .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       xn   )   is a basis oj a free abelian group                                                                         F and as Z, then for all
Theorem 1.2. ^/2^ two bases of a free abelian group F have the same cardinality.                                                                                                                                i    9^ j {xi,          .       .       .       ,       Xj_i,Xj            + axi,x              j+1 ,        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 xn   )       is also                       a basis ofF.


         The cardinal number of any basisA' of the free abelian group F is thus an invari-                                                                                                                          PROOF. Since Xj = -axi + ( Xj + ojt<), it follows that F = (x u       x^x,- +                                                                                                                                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                axi,x 1+u    jc n ). If k lXl +   + (x + axi) + •••+ k n x n = (fo e Z), then                        •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /c ;
ant of F; \X\ is called the rank of F.                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^ixi H   h (fo +           H    h /cyjry H     n x n = 0, which implies that k =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A:,-fl)jr,-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f-   /:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                for all /.
         SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.2.                                                                             First suppose F has a basis              X of finite cardinal-
ity n so that  F^ Z    -0 Z (n summands). For any subgroup G of F verify that
                                                               •




2G =              (
                      2u       |
                                   « £ G} is a subgroup of G. Verify that the restriction of the isomorphism
F^Z0---0Z to 2F                                                                is            an          isomorphism 2F                        ^ 2Z ©• •© 2Z, whence
                                                                                                                                                          •                                                     Theorem 1.6. IfFis a free abelian group offinite rank n andG is a nonzero subgroup
F/2F^ Z/2Z0- -0Z/2Z^Z 0-                            •
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                  •   -
                                                                                                                          ®Z   2 (n summands) by Corollary 1.8.11.                                              of F, then there exists a basis   u                                                              {               .           .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  xn      }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ofF,an integer r (1 < r < n) and positive
Therefore |F/2F| = 2". If Y is another basis of Fand r any integer such that Y\ > r.                                                                                                     \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                integers du          d r such that di   .           .    .    ,                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d2   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d r and G         is   free abelian with basis
then a similar argument shows that |F/2F| > 2 r whence 2 r < 2 n and r < n. It follows                                         ,                                                                                {diXi,      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       d r x r ).
that |K|                  = m < n and |F/2F| = 2 m                                                       .       Therefore 2- = 2 n and              |*|      =       /i       = m = \Y\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REMARKS. Every subgroup of a free abelian group of (possibly infinite) rank a
                     F is infinite, then all bases are infinite by the previous paragraph.
         If one basis of                                                                                                                                                                                        is   free of rank at most a; see Theorem IV.6.1. The notation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         'Wi   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d   2   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d " means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r

Consequently, in order to complete the proof it suffices to show that \X\ = |F|, if A"                                                                                                                          "di divides d2                              ,       d2 divides d3 etc."                 ,



is any infinite basis of F. Clearly 1*1 < |F|. Let 5 =    U       where Xn = X X      XX                                                                                                     •   •   •



                                                                                                                                            neN*
                                                               = (x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF OF 1.6. If/7 = l,thenF= (x^^ZandG = (dlXl ^ Z {d e N*) by
(n factors). For each s                                                             .   .    .       x n ) eS let G s be the subgroup (x u                        .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                     x n ). Then                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )                                            t
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Theorems 1.3.5, 1.3.1, and 1.3.2. Proceeding inductively, assume the theorem is true
G ^ Z^i 0- -0 Z>>, where >>],...,>>«
     s
                                        •
                                                                                                                               < n) are the         distinct elements of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                for all free abelian groups of rank less than n. Let S be the set of all
{jci,     .   .   .
                      ,
                          a„|. Therefore, |G S             = |Z<| = |Z| = No by Introduction, Theorem 8.12.
                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         those integers s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                such that there exists a basis !>>i,       y n of F and an element in G of the form
Since F = [J G Si                               we have |F| = |(J CI < l^lNo by Introduction, Exercise 8.12.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .       .           .   ,            }


                                                                                                                                                                                                                syi    +ky H    2  k n y n (k { e Z). Note that in this case {y 2i y u y^ ...,>>»} is also a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                        f-

But by Introduction, Theorems 8.11 and 8.12, \S\                                                                                        = \X\, whence |f| < |AT|So = W-                                         basis of F, whence k 2 eS; similarly k eS fory = 3,4,                Since G ^ 0, we have                                                2


Therefore F| = \X\ by the Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem.
                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5^0. Hence 5 contains a least positive integer ^ and for some basis                                                                                                                                                                             {>>i,               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   yn   J
                                                                                x                                                                                                                                                       x                                                                                                                                                        .




74                                                     CHAPTER                                       II                 THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.    FREE ABELIAN GROUPS                                    75



of F there exists v e G such that                                                          = dy + k y H      h k n y n By the division
                                                                                                                                    v       l           l               2   2                                                                   .                                                                            (c) If F is free abelian, it is not true that every linearly independent subset of

algorithm  for each / = 2,                                                                   = d q + r with        < n < du whence                          x   {                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F may be extended to a basis of F.
v = ^(^ -J- q y,                 2
                                              -\                     1-
                                                                            qn yn ) + r v H    h ^>V Let Xi = yi + W2 H     2  h    2                                                                                                                                                                                       (d) If F is free abelian, it is not true that every generating set of F contains a

then by Lemma 1.5 W =            u y 2) ...,>'„} is a basis of F. Since     {                                                                                                                                           1;      e           G, r                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t   < ^1 and W in                                         basis of F. However, if F is also finitely generated by n elements, F has rank

#/7.y order is a basis of F, the minimality of d in S implies that                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = r = r =               2               3           •       •       •   =   /\,           m <           /2.


so that diXi                 =           i;   £      G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.    Let   X=             {   0;   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / e   /)   be a set. Then the free abelian group on        X (isomorphic to)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is


         Let // =
                (j>2,>'3,      ^n). Then // is a free abelian group of rank n — 1 such that
                                                                •       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the group defined by the generators                                    X and the relations (in multiplicative no-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              {aiajar^r 1 = e ij el}.
F = ( Xl )    //. Furthermore we claim that G= (u)®(Gf1//) = <A*i)                (G fl //).                                                                                                                                                                            ©                                                 tation)                                                \




Since {*i,y 2          y n is a basis of F, (v) D (G D H) = 0. If w = r^i + r 2 y 2 H
                         ,   .       .   .
                                              ,            \
                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.     A free abelian group is a free group (Section 1.9) if and only if it is cyclic.
rny n s G (u £ Z), then by the division algorithm h = </i<yi       n with < n < di.                                                                                                                                     +
Thus G contains u - qiv = r x        / 2 >'2 H    h     The minimality of di in 5 im-           x           x           +                                                                                                                                                                                          5.    The direct sum of a family of free abelian groups is a free abelian group. (A
plies that ri = 0, whence t 2 y 2 H h r n yn £ G D //and w = <?ii?   (^2 H    h '*)>n).                                                                                                                                         +                                                                                        direct             product of free abelian groups need not be free abelian; see L. Fuchs
Hence G = (1?) + (G D //), which proves our assertion (Definition 1.8.8).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [13, p. 168].)
   Either G fl H = 0, in which case G =            and the theorem is true or
G D H ^ 0. Then by the inductive assumption there is a basis                                                                                                                                                                        {           2   ,x 3 , ...,*„)                                      of //      6.    If    F =            ^ Zx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              xeX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is     a free abelian group,            and   G is the subgroup with basis
and positive integers r,d2i d2           dr such that ^2 dz         dr and G D H is free,           .       .       .   ,                                                       |           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ©                                                   X' = X —                {x             for some x            s X,   then F/G   ^ Zx Generalize this result to ar-
abelian with basis d2x 2 ...,dr x r \. Since F = <*i>
                                                   {
                                                             //and G = (rfun)
                                                                    ,
                                                                                     (G D //),                                                                              ©                                                                                                                                            bitrary subsets X' of X.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            }                                                  .




it follows easily that \x u x 2       x n is a basis of F and {^1,         dTx T is a basis of
                                                                                ,
                                                                                    .       .           .
                                                                                                                ,               ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                   \




G. To complete the inductive step of the proof we need only show that di d2 By the                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.    A nonzero free abelian group has a subgroup of index n for every positive
division algorithm d2 = qdi + r with            < r < du Since {* 2 ,*i + qx 2 ,x^         *„}                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       .       ,                integer n.
is a basis of F by  Lemma       1.5 and   r x 2 +      + (7x 2) = diXi + ^/2x 2 £ G, the mini-
mality of di in 5 implies that r = 0, whence ^1 </2                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.    Let G be the multiplicative group generated by the real matrices a =


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and b =                                     If    H    is   the set of all matrices in        G whose (main) diagonal
Corollary 1.7. IfG is a finitely generated abelian group generated by n elements, then                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^ j^.
every subgroup H of G may be generated by        elements with    < n.                                                                                      m                                                               m                                                                                            entries are 1 , then                          H   is   a subgroup that is not finitely generated.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9.    Let G be a finitely generated abelian group in which no element (except 0) has
         The corollary is false if the word abelian is omitted (Exercise 8).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             finite order. Then                          G is a free abelian group. [Hint: Theorem 1.6.]
   PROOF OF 1.7. By Theorem 1.4 there is a free abelian group F of rank n and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10. (a)       Show that the additive group of rationals Q is not finitely generated.
an epimorphism tt F — > G. 7r (//) is a subgroup of F, and therefore, free of rank                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Show that Q is not free.
                               _1
                                                       :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b)

m n<  by Theorem   1.6. The image     under tt of any basis of tt-\H) is a set of at most                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (c)   Conclude that Exercise 9 is false if the hypothesis "finitely generated" is
m elements that generates tv(tv~ 1 {H)) = H. m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           omitted.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11. (a)      Let G be the additive group of all polynomials in x with integer coefficients.

                                                                                                                        EXERCISES                                                                                                                                                                                        Show that G is isomorphic to the group Q* of all positive rationals (under
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         multiplication). [Hint:                                Use the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic to con-
    1.   (a) If          G is an abelian group and m e Z, then mG = \mu \ueG] is a sub-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  struct an isomorphism.]
         group of G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b)    The group Q* is free abelian with basis {p\p is prime in Z}.
         (b) If          G ^ XI G                              i9   then                mG                                                mG and G l mG = XI ft//wft.
                                                                                                                                                <

                                              i"eJ                                                                                  is/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12.    Let F be the free (not necessarily abelian) group on a set X(sls in Section 1.9) and
    2.   A subsetA'of an abelian group Fis said to be linearly independent if     H       h                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G the free group on a set Y. Let F' be the subgroup of F generated by
              = always implies n = for all (where n e Z and x u           ,x k are distinct     {
                                                                                                                                                /                                   x                                                       .       .       .                                                            {aba~ b~ l a,beF] and similarly for G'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |




         elements of X).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a) F'          < F, G' <3 G and F/F', G/G' are abelian [see Theorem 7.8 below].
            (a) X is linearly independent if and only if every nonzero element of the sub-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F/F' [resp. G/G'] is a free abelian group of rank \X\ [resp. \Y\}. [Hint:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b)

         group (X) may be written uniquely in the form mx^ +         + n kx k (m £ Z,«i 5^ 0,                                                                                                               •       •   •                                                                                                \xF'  x eX] is a basis of F/F'.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I




         xi, .   .x k distinct elements of X).
                     .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (c)          F^G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      if and only if 1*1 = \Y\. [Hint: if <p F G, then <p induces an               :   =
            (b) If F is free abelian of finite rank n, it is not true that every linearly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                isomorphism F/F'^G/G'. Apply Proposition 1.3 and (b). The converse
         independent subset of n elements is a basis [Hint: consider F = Z].                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is   Theorem 1. 7. 8.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;




76                                                             CHAPTER                                             II          THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                  2.       FINITELY GENERATED ABELIAN                          GROUPS                                         77



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lemma 2.3. // m is a positive integer and = Pi ni p 2 n2< p t nt (pi,              m                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,   p t distinct
2. FINITELY GENERATED ABELIAN GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                              primes and each n; > 0), then Z m Z pl »i Z P2n » ©• •© Z Ptnt        ^      ©                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




          We begin by proving two different structure theorems for finitely generated                                                                                                                                                                                    SKETCH OF PROOF. Use induction on the number                                                           of primes in the prime
abelian groups.     A uniqueness theorem (2.6) then shows that each structure theorem                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  decomposition of m and the fact that
provides a set of numerical invariants for a given group (that is, two groups have the
same invariants if and only if they are isomorphic). Thus each structure theorem                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Zrn ^Z ©Zn          r          whenever     {r,n)   = 1,
leads to a complete classification (up to isomorphism) of all finitely generated abelian
groups. As in Section 1, all groups are written additively. Many of the results (though                                                                                                                                                                           which we now prove. The element n = nl eZrn has order r (Theorem 1.3.4 (vii)),
not the proofs) in this section may be extended to certain abelian groups that are not                                                                                                                                                                            whence Zr           ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (nl) < Zrn and the map ^: Zr —>Z rn given by k H> n k is a monomor-
finitely generated; see L. Fuchs [13] or I. Kaplansky [17].                                                                                                                                                                                                       phism. Similarly the map ^ 2 :Zn                                    —>Z™ given by k |-> rk is a monomorphism. By the
   All of the structure theorems to be proved here are special cases of corresponding                                                                                                                                                                             proof of Theorem 1.8.5 the map \p :Zr  n -* Z rn given by {x,y)           @Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iM*) 4- My) =                                      H
theorems for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain (Section IV.6).                                                                                                                                                                             nx + ry is a well-defined homomorphism. Since {r,n) = 1 ra -f- nb = 1 for some                      ,



Some readers may prefer the method of proof used in Section IV.6 to the one used                                                                                                                                                                                    s Z (Introduction, Theorem 6.5). Hence k = rak + nbk = \p{bk,ak) for all

here, which depends heavily on Theorem 1.6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       keZrn and\p is an epimorphism. Since \Z @Zn = rn = \Z \A must also be a        r       \                      Tn

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  monomorphism.


Theorem 2.1. Every finitely generated abelian group G is {isomorphic to) a finite
direct sum of cyclic groups in which the finite cyclic summands {if any) are of orders                                                                                                                                                                            Corollary 2.4. IfG is a finite abelian group oforder n, then                                        G has a subgroup oforder
mi, ...                ,
                               m           t,   where mi >                             1           and m                       Y    |
                                                                                                                                        m   2   1
                                                                                                                                                    •       •           •       |m t            .                                                                 m for every positive integer m that divides n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k
    PROOF. If G y£ and G is generated by n elements, then there is a free abelian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SKETCH OF PROOF. Use Theorem 2.2 and observe that G                                                                            d implies
group F of rank n and an epimorphism ir            G by Theorem 1.4. If ir is an iso-                                                                                           :       F—          >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =i           i

morphism, then                                         G^/
                         7 ^Z©---©Z(/j summands). If not, then by Theorem 1 .6                                                                                                                                                                                    that |C|      = \Gi\\G --\G k and for / < r.p^Z^Z^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \                                  by Lemma 2.5 (v) below.
there is a basis {*i, ...,*„ of Fand positive integers du   ,dT such that 1 < r < n,       |                                                                                                                       .   .   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n

di        d2       •       •       •
                                           d and {dix u
                                                r                                  .   .           .               drx t        )       is a        basis of                                        K = Ker                ir.   Now F =            (**")   and         REMARK. Corollary 2.4 may be false if G is not abelian (Exercise 1.6.8).
      |
               !
                                       I                                                                   ,

               r                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i   =l
K=         ^
           i'=l
                               (diXi),                where                    (*,-)               = Z and under the same isomorphism                                                                                                      (</,•*,•)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^ diZ        In Theorem 2.6 below we shall show that the orders of the cyclic summands in the

= {dm \ueZ\. For                                                       /       = r + 1, r + 2,                                                          .           .           .       ,   n       let   d =
                                                                                                                                                                                                           x   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               so that    K=   ^i=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d x,).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  decompositions of Theorems 2.1 and 2.2 are in fact uniquely determined by the group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G. First we collect a number of miscellaneous facts about abelian groups that will be
Then by Corollaries 1.5.7, 1.5.8, and 1.8.11                                                                                                                                                                                                                      used in the proof.


                                            G^F/K = Z <*i) /Z<^>
                                                                                   i=i                                     /   i=i                                                          i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                        {xiWiXi)                 Z Z/4Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^ i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lemma 2-5. Let G be an abelian group, m an integer and p a prime integer. Then each
If di= 1, then Z/*Z = Z/Z = 0; if d > 1, then Z/diZ^Zdi if di = 0, then                                                                                     x                                                                         ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of the following is a subgroup ofG:
Z/diZ = Z/0 ^ Z. Let wi,         m be those d (in order) such that di ^ 0, 1 and let s                 .       .       .
                                                                                                                           ,        t                                                       x



be the number of di such that di = 0. Then                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (i)    mG = (mu usG);           |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ii)   G[m] = (usG                               mu = 0);
                                                               G^Z^©---@Z^©(Z©-.-©Z),                                                                                                                                                                                   (iii)   G(p) =      {   u s          G    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |u|   = p n for some n > 0J
where m                        l       >        1 ,   Wi   |
                                                               m   2       |
                                                                               •   •   •
                                                                                               |
                                                                                                       m and (Z ©  t
                                                                                                                                                                •           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                        © Z) has rank                            s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (iv)    G = {usG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |u| is finite}.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  In particular there are isomorphisms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (v)    Z p »[p] = Z p (n > 1) and p m Z pn ^ Z pn- m (m < n).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Let   H and Gi          (i e I)            be abelian groups.
Theorem 2.2. Every finitely generated abelian group G is {isomorphic to) a finite                                                                                                                                                                                       (vi)    //g   :   G — ^ Gi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                >                         is an isomorphism, then the restrictions               ofgto mG and G[m]
direct sum ofcyclic groups, each of which is either infinite or oforder a power ofa prime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  respectively are isomorphisms                                      mG ^ ^ mGj and G[m] ^ ^ Gj[m].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      itl

          SKETCH OF PROOF. The theorem is an immediate consequence of Theorem                                                                                                                                                                                              Iff :G -*H is an isomorphism, then the restrictions off to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (vii)                                                                                                            G and Ci(p) re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t

2.1       and the following lemma. Another proof is sketched in Exercise 4.                                                                                                                                                                                       spectively are isomorphisms t     t and G(p)    H(p).         G =H                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G                                                                                                                                                                                1




78                                             CHAPTER                   II       THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                          2.              FINITELY GENERATED ABELIAN                                                                                                             GROUPS                                                  79


            SKETCH OF PROOF, (i)-(iv) are exercises; the hypothesis that G is abelian is                                                                                                                                        with each n i ,k i a power of a prime (different primes may occur) and F,F r free abelian;
essential (5 3                                               and Exercise 1.3.5 for (iv)).
                                    provides counterexamples for                                                 (i)-(iii)                                                                                                  (there is at least one such decomposition by Theorem 2.2).     We must show that r = d
                                                                        ~
(v) p
      n~
         zZpn has order p by Theorem 1.3.4 (vii), whence {p n )=Zp and (/? n_1 )
                    l                                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and (after reordering) m = k for every /. It is easy to see that the torsion subgroup of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       {


< Zpn [p]. If u eZpn [p], then pu = in ZpTl so that pu = (mod p n ) in Z. But p n pu
            ~                               n~                    n~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                \                                ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               zm F is (isomorphic to)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Zni and similarly for the other decomposition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ^
implies p n    u. Therefore, inZ p7l u z {p    ) andZpTl [p] < (p    ). For the second state-
                            l                                                                       l                                                     l
                                \




                                           '
                                                                              ,



ment note that p m zZpn has order p n m by Theorem 1.3.4 (vii). Therefore p mZpn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hence ]T Zn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •   ^G= t                             z*y by Lemma 2.5. For each prime                                                                                                           /?,   (]T Zni )(p) is obvi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i     J = \
 = (p m ) Zpn -m. (vi) is an exercise, (vii) If f:G —* His a homomorphism and x z G(p)
                        =                                                                                                                                                                                                   ously (isomorphic to) the direct sum of those                                                                                     Z such that n is a power of p and sim-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ni                                            {

has order p n then p nf(x) = f(p nx) = f(0) = 0. Therefore f(x) z H(p). Hence
                                    ,                                                                                                                                                                                       ilarly for the other decomposition. Since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (^ Zni )(p) ^   Z )(p) for each prime p                                         ki
/ G(p) — H{p). If / is an isomorphism then the same argument shows that
        :                   >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by Lemma 2.5, it suffices to assume that G = G and each n^kj is a power of a fixed                                                                              t

/- H(p) -> G(p). Since//" = l/, (p) and/~ /= l 0(p) G(/>)
        1
            :
                                                                     1
                                                                        //(/?). The other con-
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                  ,                       ^                                                                 prime p (so that G = G(p)). Hence we have
clusion of (vii) is proved similarly.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                     d

            If   G is an abelian group, then the subgroup G defined in Lemma                                         t                                                    2.5 is called the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J2 ZP °i = G = J2 Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =1                                j= 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M <        l                       «1          < «2 <                   •       •   •   < o              r;   1       <                < C <      2   •   •   •   < C d ).
torsion subgroup of G. If           G = G h then G is said to be a torsion group. If G = 0, then                                                                                        t



G is said to be torsion-free. For a complete classification of all denumerable torsion                                                                                                                                             We first show that in any two such decompositions of a group we must have
groups, see I. Kaplansky [17].                                                                                                                                                                                              r    = d. Lemma 2.5 and the first decomposition of G show that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r



Theorem 2.6. Let G be a finitely generated abelian group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G[p]         ^ Z zAp\ =Z ©--®Z (r summands),                                         P                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i=l

    (i) There is a unique nonnegative integer s such that the number of infinite cyclic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            whence \G[p]\ = p r                    .   A similar argument with the second decomposition shows that
summands in any decomposition of G as a direct sum of cyclic groups is precisely s;                                                                                                                                         \G[p]\       = p d Therefore, p r = p d and r = d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .


    (ii) either G is free abelian or there is a unique list of {not necessarily distinct)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Let v (1               < v < r) be the first integer such that a» = a for all < v and a ^ c                                                                                                                    /
positive integers mi,      m such that mi > 1, mi m 2
                                                .   .   .
                                                            ,
                                                                m and
                                                                t                                                         |           1
                                                                                                                                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                      |       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            We may assume that a < c                         Since p avZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v        = for a < a the first decomposi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v.                                                  pai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v         v.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  {                   v,

                                                                 G^Z ©-- ©Z ©F             mi            -
                                                                                                                     mt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tion and Lemma 2.5 imply that


with F free abelian;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r                                                        r

            (iii)       either          G is free abelian or there is a list of positive integers pi                                                                                  81
                                                                                                                                                                                           ,   .   .   .   ,   pk *,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i=l                                                  i   =v +
which is unique except for the order of its members, such that pi,                                                                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,    pk are (not
necessarily distinct) primes, Si,                                                           s k are      (not necessarily distinct) positive integers                                                                       with a v+ i — a v < a v+2 — a v <                                                                                                                                                                                                 — (v + 1) +
                                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •       •       •       <a —a       r               v.       Clearly, there are at most r
and                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1    = r - v nonzero summands. Similarly since a = d for / < v and a v < c v the                                                                                    t



                                                                G =Z                  pI
                                                                                           s.   ©...©Z              pk
                                                                                                                         sk
                                                                                                                              ©F                                                                                            second decomposition implies that

with F free abelian.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p av        G^J2Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -a                             pCl             v,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i        v

            PROOF,                  (i)   Any decomposition of G as a direct sum of cyclic groups (and there is
at least one by Theorem 2.1) yields an isomorphism                                                                            G=H                     ©       F, where //is a direct                                        with 1< c v — a v < c v+i — a v < < c r — a v Obviously there are at least r — v 1             •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .                                                                                                +
sum of finite cyclic groups (possibly 0) and F is a free abelian group whose rank is                                                                                                                                        nonzero summands. Therefore, we have two decompositions of the group p av G as a
precisely the number s of infinite cyclic summands in the decomposition. If                                                                                                                                                 direct sum of cyclic groups of prime power order and the number of summands in

l  H -» H © F the canonical injection (h H (hfi)), then clearly i(H) the torsion
    :                                     is                                                                                                                                      is                                        the first decomposition is less than the number of summands in the second. This
subgroup of H © F. By Lemma 2.5, G = l(H) under the isomorphism G = H © F.                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            contradicts the part of the Theorem proved in the previous paragraph (and applied
Consequently by Corollary 1.5.8, G/G = (F © H)/l(H) ^ F. Therefore, any                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            here to p av G). Hence we must have a = a for all /.                                                               t


decomposition of G leads to the conclusion that G/G                                                                           t       is a            free abelian group whose                                                    (ii)       Suppose G has two decompositions, say
rank is the number s of infinite cyclic summands in the decomposition. Since G/                                                                                                                                         t



does not depend on the particular decomposition and the rank of G/G is an                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G^Z ©.--©Z ©F and G = Z © © Z © F'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mi                                                   mt                                                                            kl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                kd

invariant by Theorem 1.2, s is uniquely determined.
   (iii) Suppose G has two decompositions, say
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            with mi >  1, mi  m2       m k > 1, k k 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |        \   k d and F, F' free abelian; (one such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t ,               x                               x   \            \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            decomposition exists by Theorem 2.1). Each m^kj has a prime decomposition and
                                                        r                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by inserting factors of the form p° we may assume that the same (distinct) primes
                                           G^^Z ©F              ni                                  and                  G=52z ®F',                   kJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,p r occur in all the factorizations, say
                                                                 Z                                                                                                                                                                                  .                     .




80                                                              CHAPTER           II           THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                   2.        FINITELY GENERATED ABELIAN GROUPS                                                                                                                        81



                                                                 mi                                                          kl = PTPT' 'P C             •
                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                     T




                                                                 W — Pi P
                                                                     2                 2                   Pr                k2 = pTpT- -pT              •




                                                                 m = PTPT'
                                                                     t
                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                           -PT               k d = p\ d Yf-              •
                                                                                                                                                                 c
                                                                                                                                                             -p r d \


Since mi               \
                           m   2    1
                                        •   •   •
                                                        I
                                                            m h we must have for each y,     < a < a <                                             X]           2]
                                                                                                                                                                                 •       •   •    < a              ti .       Similarly                  where pi,   ,p r are distinct primes; for each j = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .    .                                r,  < n^      2i        n ti                               .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   ,                                              <n   <-<
     < cij < c <               2;
                                                            •   < c d for each j. By Lemmas 2.3 and 2.5
                                                                         j                                                                                                                                                                               with some na ^ 0; and finally n Yj ^      for some j. By the definition of elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t        r



                                                        Z Zvfo = Z Z =
                                                                                      t



                                                                                                       mi               Gt
                                                                                                                                      d

                                                                                                                             = ^2z =^2 Zvf"*  ki
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         divisors (Theorem 2.6 (iii)),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i=l 7 =l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G^     ^                zv^a © F where F is free abelian (and some
                                                            ij                        =1                                          t'=l                   tj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         finite summands are 0, namely those with p?" =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pf =                                                                                                   For each / = 1,2,
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1).                                                      .   .   .   ,    /

where some summands may be zero. It follows that for each ./ =                                                                                                                       1,2,          .       .       .      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r                          let mi       = Pi p      il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (that is,  w is the product of the /th row in the array above).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t



                                                                             t                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Since some                             ?± 0,         mi > 1        and by construction mi m          m By Lemma 2.3               \           2   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |     t.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G = XI ( ]C zv3 n a )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =1 1  =i   v /        i = l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  © F = z2 z ©           mi           F. Therefore,                            mu          .       .       .       ,       m are the invariant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t



                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         factors of G by Theorem 2.6 (ii).
Since mi >                      1,          there is some /?, such that 1
                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                             < ah <                     < a   t j,   whence                        ZZ  i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a has r

nonzero summands. By (iii) 2Zzp /./ nas exactI y                                                                                              r    nonzero summands, whence                                                                                  EXAMPLE. If G is the group Z           Zi,   Z     ZZQ Z then by Lemma 2.3   5   @ ® @ ®                   25                                             5i ,

                                                                                  i   =i                                                                                                                                                                 G ^Z       (Z ©Z ) ©Z25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5   ©            5    (Z ©Z )     (Z ©Z ). Hence the elementary divi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3               ©       9             ©  4                27              2

/   < d. Similarly k >                              x            1   implies that d < / and hence d =                                                   t.   By (iii) we now must have                                                                   sors of G are 2,2 2 ,3,3 ,3 ,5,5,5 which may be arranged as explained above:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2     3       2


0« =          ^ for             all             ij, which implies that                                              m = {
                                                                                                                                      for / = 1,2,               .       .   .       ,       /.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2°,          3,     5

      If      G is a finitely generated abelian group, then the uniquely determined integers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2,           32,    5
mi,   .   .   .   ,m as in Theorem 2.6 (ii) are called the invariant factors of G. The uniquely
                           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22,           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 ,    52    .


determined prime powers as in Theorem 2.6 (iii) are called the elementary divisors
of G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Consequently the invariant factors of                                                             G are             1-3-5                     = 15                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2-3 2 -5 = 90, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 2 3 3 5 2 = 2700 so that G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -    •                    Z15 Z90                           ^        ©                ©Z        2700   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A topic that would                                 fit naturally into this section is the                                              determination of the struc-
                                                        and H are isomorphic if and                                                            G                                                                                                         ture of a finitely generated abelian group which is described by generators and rela-
Corollary 2.7. Two finitely generated abelian groups
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tions. However, since certain matrix techniques are probably the best way to handle
only if G/G t and H/H t have the same rank and       and H have the same invariant                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         this question,it will be treated in the Appendix to Section VII.2. The interested
factors [resp. elementary divisors].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         reader should have little or no difficulty in reading that material at the present time.

      PROOF. Exercise.

      EXAMPLE. All finite abelian groups of order 1500 may be determined up to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXERCISES
isomorphism as follows. Since the product of the elementary divisors of a finite                                                                                                                                                                          1 .   Show that a finite abelian group that is not cyclic contains a subgroup which is
group G must be G\ and 1 500 = 2 2 3 5 3 the only possible families of elementary di-
                                                    |




                                                            2  3     2
visors are {2,2,3,5 3 }, {2,2,3,5,5 2 }, {2,2,3,5,5,5}, {2 ,3,5 }, {2 ,3,5,5
                                                                             2
                                                                               and {2 2 ,3,5,5,5}
                                                                                                       •    •
                                                                                                                    ,



                                                                                                                                                                                         }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                isomorphic to Zp                              ©Z        p for   some prime p.

Each of these six families determines an abelian group of order 1500 (for example,                                                                                                                                                                        2.    Let G be a finite abelian group and x an element of maximal order. Show that (x)
{2,2,3,5
         3
           determines 2
                   }              2       3                              0Z 0Z ©Z
                                                 125 ). By Theorem 2.2 every abelian
                                                                                        group of                                                                                                                                                                is    a direct summand of G.                                    Use this to obtain another proof of Theorem 2.1.
order 1500 is isomorphic to one of these six groups and no two of the six are iso-
morphic by Corollary 2.7.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.    Suppose G is a finite abelian /?-group (Exercise 7) and x e G has maximal order.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                If y s G/ (x) has order p r , then there is a representative y e                                                                                               G of the coset y such
      If the invariant factors                                                   mu    .   .   .       ,   m of a finitely generated abelian group G are
                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that \y\           = p\ [Note that if |*| = /?', then p'G = 0.]
known, then the proof of Theorem 2.6 shows that the elementary divisors of G are
the prime powers p n (n > 0) which appear in the prime factorizations of  u    m                                                                                                                               m               .       .   .   ,   t .    4.    Use Exercises 3 and 7 to obtain a proof of Theorem 2.2 which is independent of
Conversely if the elementary divisors of G are known, they may be arranged in the                                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 2.1. [Hint: If G is a p-group, let x e G have maximal order; Gl(x) is a
following way (after the insertion of some terms of the form p° if necessary):                                                                                                                                                                                  direct sum of cyclics by induction, Gl(x) = (x^)         (jc„), with |jc, = p                                ©              -      -   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ©                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ri
82                                CHAPTER                 II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                               3.     THE KRULL-SCHMIDT THEOREM                                                    83



        and 1 < n < r 2 <                   •       < rn Choose representatives Xi of x such that \x = \xi\.
                                                           .                                                      t                             {   \




                                                                                                                                                                      3.       THE KRULL-SCHMIDT THEOREM
        Show that G = (xi) 0- •©(*„)                  •                           (x) is the desired decomposition.]
                                                                                                                                                                               The groups Z and Zpn (p prime) are indecomposable, in the sense that neither is a
 5. If    G is a finitely generated abelian group such that G/G has rank /z, and is a                       t
                                                                                                                                                        H            direct sum of two of its proper subgroups (Exercise 1.8.1). Consequently, Theorems
        subgroup of G such that /////, has rank w, then /?z < n and (G/H)/(G/H) has                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                     2.2 and 2.6(iii) may be rephrased as: every finitely generated abelian group is the
        rank n — m.                                                                                                                                                  direct sum of a finite number of indecomposable groups and these indecomposable
                                                                                                                                                                     summands are uniquely determined up to isomorphism. We shall now extend this
  6.    Let £, m e N*. If (£,w) = 1, then kZm = Zm andZm [k] = 0. If /:                                                           |
                                                                                                                                      m, say w =
                                                                                                                                                                     result to a large class of (not necessarily abelian) groups. 1
        then kZm          ^ Z and Zm ^ Z*.
                              d                     [£]


  7.    A (sub)group in which every element has order a power of a fixed prime p is                                                                                            For the remainder of this chapter we return to the use of multiplicative notation
                                     = = /?°). Let G be an abelian torsion group.
        called a /?-(sub)group («c>te: |0|                            1                                                                                              for an arbitrary group.

           (a) G(p) is the unique maximum /?-subgroup of G (that is, every /7-subgroup of
        G is contained in G(p)).
           (b) (7 =        G(p)> where the sum is over all primes p such that G(p) ^ 0.                                                                              Definition 3.1.         A group G /^indecomposable ifG ^ (e) and G is not the {internal)
        [////zr: If \u\ = pi
                             ni
                                 pt \ let w,- = \u\/pi
                                   n•   •       •
                                                       ni There exist
                                                                      c e Z such that ciWi H
                                                                                     .                  t                                                            direct product of two of its proper subgroups.
        +         = 1, whence u = cimiU +           + c m u; but airnu e G(p ).]
                                                                              •
                                                                                     t   t                                    t


           (c) If H is another abelian torsion group, then G = H if and only if                                                                                            Thus       G is indecomposable if and only if G ^ (e) and G ~ H X K implies
        G(p)       =    //(/?) for all primes p.                                                                                                                     H = (e) or K = (e) (Exercise               1).


 8.     A finite abelian /?-group (Exercise 7) is generated by its elements of maximal                                                                                     EXAMPLES. Every simple group (for example, A n n ^ 4) is indecomposable.,

        order.
                                                                                                                                                                     However indecomposable groups need not be simple: Z, Zpn (p prime) and Sn are in-
 9.     How many subgroups of order p does the abelian group Zp3 0Zp2 have?
                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                     decomposable but not simple (Exercises 2 and 1.8.1).

10. (a) Let    G be a finite abelian /?-group (Exercise 7). Show that for each n > 0,
                      is a subgroup of /? G fl
     n+1                                 n
        /? fl  G
                                                     is a direct sum of copies of Zv let
                                                                                                                                                                     Definition 3.2.         A group G is said to satisfy the ascending chain condition (ACQ on
        (b) Show that (p G fl G[/>])/(p
                         n              w+1 (/ fl
                                                                                                                                                            \



        /:   be the number of copies.
                                                                                                                                                                     [normal] subgroups iffor every chain Gi <               G <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of [normal] subgroups ofG there
                                                                                                                                                                     is an integer n such that Gi          = Qtrfor all > n. G is said to satisfy the descending chain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
        (c)   Write G as a direct sum of cyclics; show that the number k of part (b) is the
        number of summands of order p n+l                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                     condition (DCC) on [normal] subgroups iffor every chain    x >    2 >             G       G   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of [normal]
                                                                                                                                                                     subgroups ofG there is an integer n such that Gi = G n for all i > n.
1 1 .   Let (7, H, and K be finitely generated abelian groups.
          (a) If G           ^            =
                      G i/0 //, then (7 7/.                                                                                                                             EXAMPLES. Every finite group satisfies both chain conditions. Z satisfies the
             (b) If      G©//=G0^, then //^                                                                                                                          ascending but not the descending chain condition (Exercise 5) and Z(p°°) satisfies
             (c)    If Gi is a free abelian                    group of rank K                ,   then G x                Z            Z^                       Z,   the descending but not the ascending chain condition (Exercise 13).
        but Z             Z ^ Z.
        Afote: there exists an infinitely generated denumerable torsion-free abelian group
        G such that G = G      G            © ©
                                    G, but G^C@G, whence (a) fails to hold with                                                                                      Theorem 3.3. Ifa group               G satisfies either the ascending or descending chain condition
        // = g     G. See A.L.S. Corner [60]. Also see Exercises 3.11, 3.12, and IV.3.12.                                                                            on normal subgroups, then            G is the direct product ofa finite number of indecomposable
12. (a)       What are the elementary divisors of the group Z2                                          0Z ©Z         9               S5 ;   what are its            subgroups.

        invariant factors? Do the same for                                Z   26     Z   42       Z49   Z       200           Ziooo.

        (b)    Determine up to isomorphism all abelian groups of order 64; do the same for                                                                              SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose G is not a finite direct product of indecom-
        order 96.
                                                                                                                                                                     posable subgroups. Let S be the set of all normal subgroups of G such that is a       H                        H
        (c)    Determine all abelian groups of order n for n < 20.                                                                                                   direct factor of  G (that is, G = H X TH for some subgroup TH of G) and //is not a
                                                                                                                                                                     finite direct product of indecomposable subgroups. Clearly G e S. If H e S, then H is
13.     Show that the invariant factors of Zm                                      ©Z are (m,n) and
                                                                                          n                               [m,n] (the greatest                        not indecomposable, whence there must exist proper subgroups                KH and JH of such                 H
        common divisor and the least common multiple) if (m,n) > 1 and mn if (m,n) = 1.                                                                              that       H = KH X JH (= Jh X KH           ).   Furthermore, one of these groups, say KHi must
14. If        H    is   a subgroup of a finite abelian group G, then (7 has a subgroup that is
                                                                                                                                                                     lie   in 5 (in particular,    KH is normal in G by Exercise 1.8.12). Let / S — S be the map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :       >


        isomorphic to G/ H.

15.     Every finite subgroup of Q/Z is cyclic [see Exercises 1.3.7 and 7].                                                                                                x
                                                                                                                                                                               The results of this section are not needed in the sequel.
                                                                                                                                              .               .                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




84                     CHAPTER                         II           THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                3.     THE KRULL-SCHMIDT THEOREM                                                                                                                  85



defined by f(H) =      KH By the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction (with
                                 .                                                                                                                                                                   PROOF. Since /is a normal endomorphism each Im /* (k > 1) is normal in G.
f = / for all n) there exists a function <p N —> 5 such that
 n                                                                              :                                                                                                                 Hence we have two chains of normal subgroups:

                <K0) =       G            and                   ?(*     + 1) = /(<?(")) = Kv(n) (n > 0).                                                                                                            G > Im /> Im p >                        •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and      (e)   < Ker /< Ker P <                                              •   •




If we denote v(n) by G„, then we have a sequence of subgroups                                                                                         G ,Gi,G         2,   .   .   .   ,   of G   By hypothesis there is an n such that Im /* = Im fn and Ker /* = Ker fn for all
(all of which are in 5) such that                                                                                                                                                                 k > n. Suppose a e Ker fn fl Im fn Then a = fn (b) for some be G and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b)                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                   = fn (fn (b)) = fn (a) = e> Consequently, b e Ker/2 " = Ker fn so that a = fn (b) = e.
                     G = G               Gi = J^g G 2 = KGl                                                      Gn+ = KGn
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Therefore, Ker fn f) Im f n = (e). For any c e G, /n (c) e Im / n = Im P n whence
                                                                                                .   .
                                     ;                              5                       ;               .;                i                   \   .   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,



By construction each G is normal in G and
                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                  fn(c) = /2 n (t/) for some </e G. Thus fn (cfn (dr )) = /"(c) /^W" ) = /"(c) Z2          1                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "^   1



                                                                                                                                                                                                   = fn(c)fn (c)- = e and hence c/n (^0 e Ker fn Since c = (cf n(d- ))f n(d), we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l


                                               G > Gi > G > G >                 2                   3                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  conclude that G = (Ker /n)(Im f n). Therefore G = Ker fn X Im f n by Definition
                                                        5*              *               *                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.8.8.
If G satisfies the descending chain condition on normal subgroups, this is a con-
tradiction. Furthermore a routine inductive argument shows that for each n > 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        An endomorphism /of a group G is said to be nilpotent if there exists a positive
G = G n X Jo n X /G n _ X
                _i             X Jg with each JGi a proper subgroup of G. Conse-
                                 2
                                           •   •   •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = e for all g e G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  integer n such that fn (g)
quently, there is a properly ascending chain of normal subgroups:

                         Jg              < Jd X Jg < Jg X Jg X Jg <                 2                   x
                                                                                                                                  -   -   •




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Corollary 3.6. If             G       is an indecomposable group that satisfies both                                                  the ascending and
If   G satisfies the ascending chain condition on normal subgroups, this is a con-                                                                                                                descending chain conditions on normal subgroups and i is a normal endomorphism ofG,
tradiction.                                                                                                                                                                                       then either f is nilpotent or f is an automorphism.


     In order to determine conditions under which the decomposition of Theorem 3.3                                                                                                                    PROOF. For some n>l,G = Ker fn X Im/n by Fitting's Lemma. Since G is
                            and lemmas are needed. An endomorphism /of a group
is unique, several definitions                                                                                                                                                                    indecomposable either Ker f n = (e) or Im fn = (e). The latter implies that /is nil-
G is called a normal endomorphism if af(b)ar l = f(aba~ l ) for all a,b e G.                                                                                                                      potent. If Ker fn = (e), then Ker /= (e) and /is a monomorphism. Therefore, /is
                                                                                                                                                                                                  an automorphism by Lemma 3.4.


Lemma 3.4. Let G be a group that satisfies the ascending [resp. descending] chain                                                                                                                   If G is a group and f, g are functions from G to G, then f + g denotes the function

condition on normal subgroups and f a [normal] endomorphism ofG. Then f is an auto-                                                                                                               G —» G given by a H> f(a)g(a). Verify that the set of all functions from G to G is a group
morphism if and only iff is an epimorphism [resp. monomorphism].                                                                                                                                  under + (with identity the map G :G — G given by a I—» e for all a e G). When f and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    »


                                                                                                                                                                                                  g are endomorphisms of G, f + g need not be an endomorphism (Exercise 7). So the
                                                                                                                                                                                                  subset of endomorphisms is not in general a subgroup.
   PROOF. Suppose G satisfies the ACC and /is an epimorphism. The ascending
chain of normal subgroups (e) < Ker / < Ker / 2 <  (where /*=#•••/) must                                          •   •       •




become constant, say Ker f n = Ker /n+1 Since /is an epimorphism, so is /n If a e G
                                                                            .                                                                                                  .




and f(a) = e, then a = f n (b) for some b s G and = f(a) = f n+ \b). Consequently                           *?                                                                                    Corollary 3.7. Let             G (^ (e)) be an indecomposable group that satisfies both the as-
b s Ker f n+l = Ker / n which implies that a = /n (6) =
                         ,                              Therefore, /is a monomor-                                                                                                                 cending and descending chain conditions on normal subgroups, //fi,                                                                .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,       fn are normal

phism and hence an automorphism.                                                                                                                                                                  nilpotent endomorphisms ofG such that every in                                  +    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •.+ fir (1      <   ii   <       i2       <       •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         < n)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  is an    endomorphism, then fi                  +   f2 H              h f„ is nilpotent.
     Suppose G satisfies the DCC and /is a monomorphism. For each A: > 1, Im/* is
normal in G since /is a normal endomorphism. Consequently, the descending chain                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since each fi H              h fi r is an endomorphism that is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x



G > Im/> Im/2 >          •   •
                              must become constant, say Im f n = Im / n+1 Thus for any
                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  normal (Exercise 8(c)), the proof will follow by induction once the case n = 2 is
a s G, / n («) = f n+ \b) for some £ £ G. Since /is a monomorphism, so is f n and hence                                                                                                           established. If           / + / is not nilpotent, it is an automorphism by Corollary 3.6. Verify
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2


/n (#) = fn+ \b) = fn (f(b)) implies a = f(b). Therefore /is an epimorphism, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                  that the inverse g off           + / is a normal automorphism. If g = fig and g = fig, then                      Y                                     2


hence an automorphism.                                                                                                                                                                            l<z = gi + g and for all x e G, x" = (gl + g^x' ) = giix-^ix' ). Hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                     1                                                         1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  x = teiC*" )^* -1 )]" = g2(x)gi(x) = (g + g,)(x) and 1 G = g + gi. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                      2

                                                                                                                                                                                                  gi + g2 = g + gi and gi(gi + g ) = gil G = lcgi = (gi + g )gi, which implies that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                   2                                                              2

                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sig2 = g2gu A separate inductive argument now shows that for each m > 1,
Lemma 3.5. (Fitting) IfG is a group that satisfies both the ascending and descending
chain conditions on normal subgroups and f is a normal endomorphism ofG, then for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
some n > 1, G = Ker f        n
                                         X Im f             n
                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (gi   + #2)™ = 2 <\^:r (c e z),                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                              ;




86                                                                    CHAPTER                                      II                      THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.              THE KRULL-SCHMIDT THEOREM                                                                                                                                                                            87



where the d are the binomial coefficients (see Theorem III. 1.6) and c h means                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {                                            The preceding identities show that (p r = <£v!g = <^r(^i +     + ^«) = ^v^v +                                                                                                                                     •   •   •                                                           •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •




h + h H      h h (d summands). Since each f is nilpotent, gi = fg has a nontrivial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     + (A^. Every "sum" of distinct <p ripi is a normal endomorphism (Exercises 8, 9).
kernel, whence g is nilpotent by Corollary 3.6. Therefore for large enough m and all
                                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Since <p r G r = l Gr is a (normal) automorphism of G r and G r satisfies both chain con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ditions on normal subgroups (Exercise 6), Corollaries 3.6 and 3.7 imply that Mi \G r
a s G, (#i+ g2)^(«) = ]C ^i^r~*(«) = II
                                      =
                                                                                                                                                                                                             =                               But this contradicts the facts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is an automorphism of G r i£ (e) for some j(r < j < t). Therefore, for every n > 1
                       =                                                                      t'
                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n+l
that gi + g = 1g and G ^ (e).    2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (<Pr^j)     is also an automorphism of G. Consequently, since G r 5* (e) and (Mi) n+1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = (PriipjiPrW] for all /2 > 1 the normal endomorphism \pj(p r ft ft —> ft cannot be  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :




    The next theorem will make use of the following facts. If a group G is the internal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nilpotent. Since ft satisfies both chain conditions (Exercise 6), \pj(p r Hj must be an                                                                                                                                                |




direct product of its subgroups Gi,     G then by the proof of Theorem 1.8.6 there                                                                 .       .   .                 s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      automorphism of Hj by Corollary 3.7. Therefore \pj G r G r —> Hj is an isomor-                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^
                                                                                                                                                                    ,



is an isomorphism cp    Gi X     X G     G given by (gi,        g ) }-> gig 2 -gs Con-:                    •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                           s    ^                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      phism and so is <p r Hj Hj —> G r Reindex the           so that we may assume j = r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :                                               .




sequently, every element of G may be written uniquely as a product gig 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g s (gi s                       G ).    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and G r      ^Hr We have proved the first half of statement P(r).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




For each / the map 7r                                                                     t        :   G — G given by gig
                                                                                                           >                   t                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g s |—> gi is a well-defined epimor-                                                                                                                               G = ft X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Since           X G _i X H X        X ft by the induction hypothesis the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r                                      r       •   •   •




phism;            (it            is              the composition of <p
                                                                                                                                                               _1
                                                                                                                                                                        with the canonical projection Gi X                                                                                                                                                        •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X   subgroup GiG 2    G _ift + -ft is the internal direct product Gi X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r           G _! X          i-                                                                                                                                                           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r

G —> G
     a            t .)   We shall refer to the maps                                                                                                                7i\       as the canonical epimorphisms associated                                                                                                                                                                 ft+i X     X ft. Observe that for y < r, WGy) = ^,{G) = (e) and for j > r,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •       •       •




with the internal direct product G = ft X                                                                                                                                                ••              X G».                                                                                                                                                                        \P (Hj) = MAG) = <<?>, whence ^ (ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r                                       G _ ft+1 ft) = (<?>. Since ^ G is an                                                 r           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r   x                                                                                        r       |               r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      isomorphism, we must have G H (Gi        G _ift +r ft) = (e). It follows that the                    r                                    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r                •       -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      group G* = Gi     G _iG ft + i- ft is the internal direct product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r                r                       •       -




Theorem 3.8. (Krull-Schmidt) Let G be a group that satisfies both the ascending and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G* = Gi X                                                               X G X ft+i X                                                 X ft.
                                                  G = Gi X G X X G and
descending chain conditions on normal subgroups. If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •        •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r                                •       •       •




G = Hi X H X X H with each Gi,Hj indecomposable, then s = t and after
                                             2
                                                              •   •   •
                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Define a map                                     G —> G as follows. Every element g s G may be written g = gi
                                             = Hi for every and for each                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -   •


re indexing Gj                                                                                                 i                                                                         r       <                   t.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s ft. Let 0(g) = g r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      gr-ihr-'ht with gisGi and                                                              gr-npr(h )h r+ v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /z 3 h Clearly                                                                      •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t .



                                                                                  G = ft X                                         •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                           X G X ft+i X  r                                                           •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X ft.                                                                                                                        Im 6 = G*.                                is a       monomorphism (see Theorem 1.8.10) that is easily seen to be nor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mal. Therefore                                        is an automorphism by Lemma 3.4 so that G = Im           = G*
             REMARKS. G has at least one such decomposition by Theorem 3.3. The unique-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               = Gi X           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G X ft+i X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 X ft. This proves the second part of P(r) and com-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r                                       •   •       •




ness statement here is stronger than simply saying that the indecomposable factors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G = ft for < < min(s,r).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pletes the inductive argument. Therefore, after reindexing                                                                                                                                         t                                           /


are determined up to isomorphism.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     If min (s,t) = 5, then G X      X ft = G = ft X       X ft X ft+i X     X ft,         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •       •                                                                •           •   •                                                       •       •       •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and if min (s,t) =   then ft X     X ft = G = ft X      X ft. Since G 5^ (e),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t,                                                           •       •                                                                        •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t



    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.8. Let P(0) be the statement G = ft X                X ft.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hj y4 (e) for all ij\ we must have s = t in either case.
For < r < min (s,r) let P(r) be the statement: there is a reindexing of ft,
              1                                                                   ft                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       .   ,



such that d ^ ft for = 1,2,         r and G = Gi X        X G X ft+i X         X ft           z                            .           .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •   •       •




(or G = Gi X     X ft if r =    We shall show inductively that P(r) is true for all r
                                                 •    •   •
                                                                                                                t).

such that   < r < min (s,t). P(0) is true by hypothesis, and so we assume that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EXERCISES
P(r — 1) is true: after some reindexing G = H for             = 1,      r —     and                                                                                                              t                                       {                           /                   .       .       .           ,                                        1                        1 .   A group G is indecomposable if and only if G 5^ (e) and G = H X K implies
G = ft X        G    X
             X _i ft X       •
                                 X ft.
                                     •
                                        Let
                                         •
                                                         [resp. tt/,
                                                                  r          be the                                •       •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                             tti,                    .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tt s                                            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n-,']                                                      H = (e) or K =                                         (e).
canonical epimorphisms associated with the internal direct product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.    S n is indecomposable for all n > 2. [Hint: If n > 5 Theorems 1.6.8 and 1.6.10 and
                    G = ft X                                                  •   •
                                                                                          X ft [resp. G = ft X                                                                               •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X G _i X ft X           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X ft]                                                                                   Exercise 1.8.7 may be helpful.]

as in the paragraph preceding the statement of the Theorem. Let K [resp. A/] be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3.    The additive group Q is indecomposable.
the inclusion maps sending the ith factor into G. For each / let     = Ai-n-; G —> G                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :




and let \pi = A/7r/ G —> G. Verify that the following identities hold:
                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.     A nontrivial homomorphic image of an indecomposable group need not be in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             decomposable.
                                 Gi =                                                                                              = <pi\                                                                                                                    w,- = 0g (i9*j)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                  <Pi    |                                    ltf t       -
                                                                                                                               <pi<Pi                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;




                  1A1        H                                h       ^ = 1g;                                                  Mi = to                                                                                                                       Mi = G                          (i          ^y);                                                                          5.    (a)   Z satisfies the ACC but not the DCC on subgroups.
                  Im <Pi = d;                                                                                                  Im & = G (/ < r);                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Im ft = ft (/ > r).                                                                                                             (b)   Every finitely generated abelian group satisfies the ACC on subgroups.

It   follows that ^r^i = Ocr for all / < r (since ^(x) e G; so that (p Typi(x) = tpAG^iix)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6.    Let H,K be normal subgroups of a group G such that G =                                                                                                                                                                      H X K.
= <Pr<Pi\pi(x) =                                     *?).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a) If iV is a normal subgroup of ft then                                                                                                                N   is   normal in G (compare Exercise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5.10).
         2
             See the paragraph preceding Corollary 3.7.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (b) If                      G satisfies the ACC or DCC on normal subgroups, then so do Hand K.
88                              CHAPTER            II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                         4.        THE ACTION OF A GROUP ON A SET                                                                                  89


 7.   If/ and g are endomorphisms of a group G, then f+g need not be an endo-                                        h and the element hxh~ l is said to be a conjugate of x. If                                                        K is any subgroup of G and
      morphism. [Hint: Let a = (123), ^ = (132)sS 3 and define f(x) = axa~\                                          h s H, then /zATr 1 is a subgroup of G isomorphic to                                                           K (Exercise 1.5.6). Hence H acts
      g(x) = bxb' .]        1
                                                                                                                     on the set S of all subgroups of G by conjugation: (h,K) |—> hKh~ The group /zK/r is                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1



                                                                                                                     said to be conjugate to K.
 8.   Let / and g be normal endomorphisms of a group G.
            (a)   fg is a normal endomorphism.
            (b) //      < G implies /(//) < G.
            (c)    If   /+ g    is       an endomorphism, then it is normal.                                         Theorem 4.2. Let G be a group that acts on a set S.

 9.   Let G = Gi X   X G n For each let
                                •    •        G — G be the inclusion map and
                                               .            /   X,-   :   t   >
                                                                                                                               (i)        The relation on S defined by
      7rtG — d the canonical projection (see page 59). Let
            :       >                                          = X 7r Then the    <fi    t   t .
                                                                                                                                                                             x    ~   x' <=> gx          = x'          /or               g £   G
      "sum" iph H   h <A* of any   (1 < k < n) distinct & is a normal endomor-

      phism of G.                                                                                                    z's         equivalence relation.
                                                                                                                           (ii)       For eac/z x £ S, G x =                           {
                                                                                                                                                                                           g £   G gx = x}
                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is a subgroup                ofG.
10.   Use the Krull-Schmidt Theorem to prove Theorems 2.2 and 2.6 (iii) for finite
      abelian groups.
                                                                                                                           PROOF. Exercise.
11. If  G and H are groups such that G X G = H X Hand G satisfies both the ACC
      and DCC on normal subgroups, then G = H [see Exercise 2.11].                                                         The equivalence classes of the equivalence relation of Theorem 4.2(i) are called
12. If G,H,K and J are groups such that         G = H X K and G = H X J and G satis-                                 the orbits 3 of G on S; the orbit of x e S is denoted x. The subgroup G x is called vari-

      fies both the         ACC and DCC on normal subgroups, then K^J [see Exercise 2.11]                            ously the subgroup fixing x, the isotropy group of x or the stabilizer of x.


13.   For each prime p the group Z(/?°°) satisfies the descending but not the ascending                                    EXAMPLES.                              If a           group       G acts on itself by conjugation, then the orbit
      chain condition on subgroups [see Exercise 1.3.7].                                                             [gxg~ l g £ G} of x £ G is called the conjugacy class of x. If a subgroup //acts on G
                                                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                                     by conjugation the isotropy group x = {h e H\ hxh~ l = x} = h e             H
                                                                                                                                                                                               hx = xh\ is                                                      {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H      \




                                                                                                                     called the centralizer of x in                                   H and      is denoted             CH (x). If // = G, CgW is simply called
                                                                                                                     the centralizer of x. If                   H acts by conjugation on the set S of all subgroups of G, then
4.    THE ACTION OF A GROUP ON A SET                                                                                 the subgroup of                      H fixing K sS, namely h H hKh~ = K] called the normalizer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,   is
                                                                                                                                                                                                          {



      The techniques developed in this section will be used in the following sections to                             of K in          H and denoted Nn(K). The group Ng(K)                                                       is simply called the normalizer of K.

develop structure theorems for (nonabelian finite) groups.                                                           Clearly every subgroup                             K is normal in Nq(K) #is normal in G if and only if Ng(K) = G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;




Definition 4.1.             An action of a group G on a set S is a function G x                        S   —» S      Theorem 4.3. // a group G acts on a set S, then the cardinal number of the orbit of
(usually denoted by (g,x) |— > gx) such that for all x £ S and gi,g 2 £ G:                                           x s S / s the index [G                         :   Gx       ].



                       ex = x      and     (gig 2 )x = gi(g 2 x).
When such an action is given, we say that G acts on the set S.                                                             PROOF. Let g,h e G. Since
  Since there may be many different actions of a group G on a given set S, the nota-                                                                      gx = hx                     g~ l hx = x <=> g _1 /z £ Gx                       /zGx          = gGx            ,

tion gx is ambiguous. In context, however, this will not cause any difficulty.
                                                                                                                     it follows that the        map given by gG x |->                                              is a well-defined bijection of the set of co-

      EXAMPLE. An action of the symmetric group S n on the set /„ =                          {   1,2        ,
                                                                                                                n]   sets of          Gx in G onto the orbit x = {gx                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  g e G] Hence [G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .                 :       Gx = ]               |Jc|.


is   given by (a x)     9
                            —> <j(x).

      EXAMPLES. Let G be a group and Ha subgroup. An action of the group H on                                        Corollary 4.4. Let                            G be a finite group and K a subgroup ofG.
the set G is given by (h,x)                    hx, where hx is the product in G. The action of h e         H on
G is called a (left) translation. If K is another subgroup of G and 5 is the set of all left                               (i)        The number of elements in the conjugacy class of x £ G /s [G                                                                             :    Cq(x)], which
cosets of         K in G, then H acts on S by translation: (h,xK) |-> hxK.                                           divides |G|;
                                                                                                                               (ii)       //xi,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                  x n (xi £ G) are //ze distinct conjugacy classes ofG, then

      EXAMPLES. Let H be a subgroup of a group G. An action of Hon the set G is
given by (h,x) |— > hxhr x to avoid confusion with the product in G, this action of h £
                                         \
                                                                                                                H          3
                                                                                                                               This agrees with our previous use of the term orbit in the proof of Theorem 1.6.3, where
is always denoted hxh~ and not hx. This action of h e
                          l
                                                                              H
                                                           on G is called conjugation by                             the special case of a cyclic subgroup (<r) of S n acting on the set /„ was considered.
                                .




90                                      CHAPTER        II            THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                4.   THE ACTION OF A GROUP ON A SET                                            91


                                                                                                                                                                           The automorphism t of Corollary 4.7(i) is called the inner automorphism in-
                                                       |G|            =£[G:C G             (xi)];
                                                                                                                                                                        duced by g. The normal subgroup C(G) = Ker r is called the center of G. An element
                                                                                                                                                                        g £ G is in C(G) if and only if the conjugacy class of g consists of g alone. Thus
          (iii)   the number ofsubgroups                    ofG conjugate to K is [G                    :       Ng(K)], which divides \G\.                              if G is finite and x £ C(G), then [G   Cg(x)} = 1 (Corollary 4.4). Consequently,:



                                                                                                                                                                        the class equation of G (Corollary 4.4(ii)) may be written
          PROOF, (i) and (iii) follow immediately from the preceding Theorem and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m
Lagrange's Theorem 1.4.6. Since conjugacy is an equivalence relation on G (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \G\   = \C(G)\ + 52 &
4.2),          G is the disjoint union of the conjugacy classes x u                                 .       .   .
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                        x n whence (ii) follows
                                                                                                                          ,



from (i).
                                                                                                                                                                        where Jci,                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   x m (x{ e G — C(G)) are distinct conjugacy classes of G and each
                                                   n                                                                                                                    [G:CG (x )] > 1.          t

          The equation \G\ = 51 [G                          :       Cg(a-,-)]   as in Corollary 4.4 (ii)                      is   called the class

equation of the finite group G.
                                                                                                                                                                        Proposition 4.8. Let H be a subgroup of a group G and let G act on the set S of all
                                                                                                                                                                        left cosets                   ofH in G by left translation. Then the kernel of the induced homomorphism
Theorem 4.5. If a group G acts on a set S, then this action induces a homomorphism                                                                                      G — A(S)     >                    is contained in         H.
G — A(S), where A(S)
           >                                  is   the group of all permutations ofS.
                                                                                                                                                                             PROOF. The induced homomorphism G —> A(S) is given by g |— r where                                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,


    PROOF. If g e G, define t q S -> 5 by x |-> gx. Since x = gig^x) for all x e S,
                                                                :                                                                                                       t   :S — S and t u (xH) = gxH. If g is in the kernel, then r Q = l s and gx// = xHior
                                                                                                                                                                                              >


T g is surjective. Similarly gx = gy (x,yzS) implies x = g~Kgx) = g~\gy) = y,                                                                                           all x £ G; in particular for x = e, ge// = eH = //, which implies g £ //.

whence r Q is injective and therefore a bijection (permutation of S). Since t qq = T g T g                                                     *                >   :



5 —* 5 for all g,g' s G, the map G — A(S) given by g (-> t„ is a homomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                        Corollary 4.9.                                //H is a subgroup of index n in a group G and no nontrivial normal
                                                                                                                                                                        subgroup ofG is contained in H, then                                        G is isomorphic to a subgroup ofS   n.
Corollary 4.6. (Cay ley) IfG is a group, then there is a monomorphism G — > A(G).
Hence every group is isomorphic to a group ofpermutations. In particular every finite                                                                                      PROOF. Apply Proposition 4.8 to H\ the kernel of G —> A(S) is a normal sub-
group is isomorphic to a subgroup o/S„ with n =                                             |G|.
                                                                                                                                                                        group of G contained in //and must therefore be (e) by hypothesis. Hence, G — > A(S)
                                                                                                                                                                        is   a monomorphism. Therefore G is isomorphic to a subgroup of the group of all
   PROOF. Let G act on itself by left translation and apply Theorem 4.5 to obtain a                                                                                     permutations of the n left cosets of //, and this latter group is clearly isomorphic
homomorphism r G — A(G). If r(g) = t q = \q, then gx = t & (x) = x for all s G.
                                    :         >                                                                                                            .v
                                                                                                                                                                        to S n           .        M
In particular ge = e, whence g = e and r is a monomorphism. To prove the last
statement note if \G\ = n, then A(G) ^ S n                                        .




                                                                                                                                                                        Corollary 4.10.                                //H is a subgroup ofa finite group G ofindex p, where p is the small-
          Recall that if G is a group, then the set Aut G of all automorphisms of G is a
group with composition of functions as binary operation (Exercise 1.2.15).
                                                                                                                                                                        est prime dividing the order ofG, then                                      H       is   normal in G.

                                                                                                                                                                           PROOF. Let S be the set of all left cosets of     in G. Then A(S)    S p since                H              ^
                                                                                                                                                                        [G H] = p. If K is the kernel of the homomorphism G — * A(S) of Proposition 4.8,
Corollary 4.7. Let                      G be a group.                                                                                                                            :




                                                                                                                                                                        then K is normal in G and contained in H. Furthermore G/K is isomorphic to a sub-
          (i)     For each g s G, conjugation by g induces an automorphism ofG.                                                                                         group of S p Hence \G/K\ divides |5 P = /?! But every divisor of \G/K\ = [G K]
                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :



          (ii)    77zere /s # homomorphism G     Aut G whose kernel is C(G) = g s G gx =                                                   {           |
                                                                                                                                                                        must divide |G| = |#| [G K]. Since no number smaller than p (except 1) can divide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :



xg for all x s          G   (                                                                                                                                           |G|,         we must have \G/K\ = p or                                 1.       However \G/K\ = [G K] = [G  :   :    H][H K]   :



                                                                                                                                                                        =                     :   K] > p. Therefore \G/K\ = p and [H                           K] = 1, whence // =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :                       But # is
    PROOF. (1) If G acts on itself by conjugation, then for each g s G, the map                                                                                         normal in G.
7-0 G — G given by r (x) =
      :           >                   is a bijection by the proof of Theorem 4.5. It is
                                          &

easy to see that t is also a homomorphism and hence an automorphism, (ii) Let G
act on itself by conjugation. By (i) the image of the homomorphism r G — ^(G) of                                                       :           >                                                                                         EXERCISES
Theorem 4.5 is contained in Aut G. Clearly
                                                                                                                                                                            1.       Let G be a group and A a normal abelian subgroup. Show that G/A operates on
                      g s Ker r <=> r p = 1g                                     = r (x) = x
                                                                                      ff
                                                                                                        for all               jt   e   G.                                            A by conjugation and obtain a homomorphism G/A — Aut ^4.                                   >



But                   = x if and only if gx = xg, whence Ker r = C(G).                                                                                                   2. If               H,K are subgroups of G such that H <\ K, show that # < M?(//).
92                                      CHAPTER        II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                      5.   THE SYLOW THEOREMS                                                                                                      93



  3.    If a group                G contains an element a having exactly two conjugates, then G has a                            discussion of subgroups of maximal prime power order (second and third Sylow
        proper normal subgroup                     N ^ (e).                                                                      Theorems).

 4.     Let//beasubgroupofG.Thecentralizerof//isthesetCG (//) = {ge G hg = gh for                               \




        all h s H] Show that CG (H) is a subgroup of
                              .                      G (H).                             N
                                                                                                                                 Lemma 5.1. // a group H of order p n (p prime) acts on a finite set S and if
  5. If         H     is   a subgroup of G, the factor group                       NG (H)/CG (H) (see Exercise 4)    is   iso-   So= {xsS hx = xforallheH), then |S| = |S {mod p).
                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |




        morphic to a subgroup of Aut H.

  6.    Let G be a group acting on a set S containing at least two elements. Assjume that                                             REMARK. This lemma (and the notation S ) will be used frequently in the
                                                                                                                                 sequel. 4
        G is transitive; that is, given any x,yeS, there exists geG such that gx = y.
        Prove
                (a) for x e 5, the orbit x of x is 5;                                                                                PROOF OF 5.1. An orbit x contains exactly one element if and only if x eS                                                                                                                                         .




                (b) all the stabilizers G x (for jc eS) are conjugate;                                                           Hence S can be written as a disjoint union S = S U xi U x 2 U           U x n with                                                                         •    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,




                (c)    if    G has the property: {g e G              \
                                                                         gx = x for all x e 5} = (e) (which is the               |*| > 1 for all /. Hence \S\ = \S Q + \Xi\ + \x 2 +    h |*„|. Now p \xi\ for each i              \                \                                        \




        case if G < S n for some n and S = {1,2,                           .   ,«j)andif N < (7 and AT < G, for
                                                                               .   .
                                                                                                                                 since \xi\ > 1 and |Jc»| = [H HXi divides \H\ = p n Therefore \S\ = |5 (mod p).         :     ]                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




        some x e 5, then N = (e);
                (d) for jc e5, |S|           = [G GJ; hence \S\ divides |G|.'
                                                   :




 7.     Let G be a group and let In G be the set of all inner automorphisms of G. Show
                                                                                                                                 Theorem 5.2- (Cauchy) IfG is a finite group whose order is divisible by a prime p,
        that In G is a normal subgroup of Aut G.
                                                                                                                                 then     G contains an element of order p.
  8.    Exhibit an automorphism of                          Z that is not an inner automorphism.
                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                     PROOF. (J. H. McKay) Let S be the set of p-tuples of group elements
 9. If G/C(G) is cyclic, then                      G is abelian.                                                                 {(fli,0 2 ,    a p ) ai £ G and aia
                                                                                                                                                      •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                         -a p = e}. Since a v is uniquely determined as
                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -   •




                                                                                                                                 (aia 2  a p -i)-\ it follows that \S\ = n p ~\ where G| = n. Since p\n,\S\ =0 (mod p).
                                                                                                                                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




10.     Show that the center of 5 is (e); conclude that 5 is isomorphic to the group of
                                                   4                                         4
                                                                                                                                 Let the group Zp act on S by cyclic permutation; that is, for k eZp k(a\,a         ap)                                                                 ,                            2,       .       .       .   ,

        all inner automorphisms of 5                                                                                             = (a k+h a k+2f
                                                            4.
                                                                                                                                                  a Pf a u  a k ). Verify that (a k+u a k+2l
                                                                                                                                                                          .       .   .      a k ) e S (use the fact that
                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,



                                                                                                                                 in a groups = e implies ba = {a~ a)(Jba) = a~\ab)a = e). Verify that for 0,k,k' eZp                   l
1 1 .   Let G be a group containing an element a not of order 1 or 2. Show that G has a
        nonidentity automorphism. [Hint: Exercise 1.2.2 and Corollary 4.7.]                                                      and x £ S, Ox — x and (k + k')x = k(k'x) (additive notation for a group action on
                                                                                                                                 a set!). Therefore the action of                                                             Zp on S      is   well defined.
12.     Any finite group is isomorphic to a subgroup of A n for some n.
13. If a group                    G contains a subgroup (^ G) of finite index, it contains a normal sub-                            Now            a p ) £ S if and only if ai = a 2 =
                                                                                                                                                                          .    .      .   a p clearly (e,e,
                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •   •   =           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e) £        SQ
        group (^ G) of finite index.                                                                                             and hence \SQ ^ 0. By Lemma 5.1,           = |5| = |5 (mod p). Since |5
                                                                                                                                                                              \                                                                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^                        there
                                                                                                                                 must be at least p elements in 5 that is, there is a ^ e such that (a,a,                                                                                                            .    .               a) eS
                           = pn, with p > n, p prime, and H is a subgroup of order p, then // is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,

14. If |G|
                                                                                                                                 and hence a p = e. Since p is prime, \a\ = p.
        normal in G.

15. If a normal subgroup                       N of order p (p prime)                  is   contained in a group G of order           A group in which every element has order a power (> 0) of some fixed prime p is
        p   n
                ,   then N        is   in the center of G.                                                                       called a p-group. If                                                 H   is a       subgroup of a group G and                          H   is a /?-group, // is said to be

                                                                                                                                 a p-subgroup of G. In particular (e) is a /?-subgroup of G for every prime p since
                                                                                                                                 K*)l         = i = p°.

5.      THE SYLOW THEOREMS
   Nonabelian finite groups are vastly more complicated than finite abelian groups,                                              Corollary 5.3.                                           A finite group G is a p-group if and only // |G| is a power of p.
which were completely classified (up to isomorphism) in Section 2. The Sylow Theo-
rems are a basic first step in understanding the structure of an arbitrary finite group.                                             PROOF. If G is a /?-group and q a prime which divides |G|, then G contains an
   Our motivation is the question: if a positive integer m divides the order of a group                                          element of order q by Cauchy's Theorem. Since every element of G has order a power
G, does G have a subgroup of order ml This is the converse of Lagrange's Theorem                                                 of p, q = p. Hence |G| is a power of p. The converse is an immediate consequence of
                   abelian groups (Corollary 2.4) but may be false for arbitrary
1.4.6. It is true for
                                                                                                                                 Lagrange's Theorem 1.4.6.
groups (Exercise 1.6.8). We first consider the special case when m is prime (Theorem
5.2), and then proceed to the first Sylow Theorem which states that the answer to our
question is affirmative whenever m is a power of a prime. This leads naturally to a                                                   4
                                                                                                                                          I   am indebted to R. J. Nunke for suggesting this line of proof.
94                              CHAPTER                     II        THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                5.   THE SYLOW THEOREMS                                           95



Corollary 5.4. The center C(G) of a nontrivial finite p-group                                                                    G contains more than                                          groups). Theorem 5.7 shows that a finite group G has a nontrivial Sylow /^-subgroup

one element.                                                                                                                                                                                   for every prime p that divides |G|. Furthermore, we have



     PROOF. Consider the class equation of G (see page 91):
                                                                                                                                                                                               Corollary 5.8. Let                    G be a group oforder p n m with p prime, n >           1   and (m,p) = l.Let
                                                      |G|   = \C(G)\+^[G:CG (Xi )l                                                                                                             H be a p-subgroup ofG.
Since each [G CG (xi)] > 1 and divides G\ = p n (n > 1),/? divides each [G CG (xi)]
                       :
                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (i) H is a Sylow p-subgroup ofG if and only //|H| = p n                              .


and \G\ and therefore divides \C(G)\. Since \C(G)\ > 1, C(G) has at least p ele-                                                                                                                         (ii)   Every conjugate of a Sylow p-subgroup is a Sylow p-subgroup.
ments.                                                                                                                                                                                                  (iii)   // there is only one Sylow p-subgroup P, then P is normal in G.


                                                                                                                                                                                                        SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Corollaries 1.4.6 and 5.3 and Theorem 5.7. (ii) Exer-
Lemma 5.5. // H is a p-subgroup of a finite group G, then [N G (H)                                                                                 :   H] = [G                 :   H]          cise 1.5.6 and (i). (iii) follows from (ii).

(mod p).
                                                                                                                                                                                                        As a converse to Corollary 5.8 (ii) we have
    PROOF. Let S be the set of left cosets of H in G ano let H act on S by (left)                                        1




translation. Then |S| = [G H]. Also,                   :


                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 5.9. (Second Sylow Theorem) IfH is a p-subgroup of a finite group G, and
                                              xHeS *=> hxH = xH                                     for all        h e       H                                                             P is any Sylow p-subgroup ofG, then there exists xeG such that H < xPx -1 In par-                              .




               <^x~ hxH=H   l
                                                                 H for
                                                            for all         h H     h e   H        x~ hx s   l
                                                                                                                                  all              e                                       ticular, any two Sylow p-subgroups                          ofG are conjugate.
                               <^ x~ Hx = H       xHx- = H<^> x NG (H).
                                                  l
                                                                          <=>                 1
                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF. Let S be the set of left cosets of P in G and let H act on S by (left) trans-
Therefore |S           is   the number of cosets x// with x NG (H); that |S  = [NG (H)                  e                        is,                                               77].
                   |                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                           lation.         |5 = \S\ = [G :P] (mod p) by Lemma 5.1. But pJ^[G:P]; therefore
                                                  H] = |S                 = |S| = [G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |




By Lemma 5.1 [NG (H)                          :                       |
                                                                                                    :   H] (mod p).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                and there exists xP e S
                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                               So   |                                             .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        xP e S ^> hxP = xP          for all   h s   H
Corollary 5.6. If His p-subgroup ofa finite group G such that p divides [G                                                                                :       H], then                                                      x-'hxP = P   for all    heH^ x~ Hx < P  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H < xPx'K
N G (H) * H.                                                                                                                                                                               If His a Sylow /7-subgroup \H\                         = \P\ = \xPx~ and hence H = xPx'K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \




     PROOF.                 = [G          :   //]     = [^W H] (mod           Since [NG (H)
                                                                                :                           /?).                               :   H] > I             in       any
case, we must have [NG (H) : H]                           > 1. Therefore iVG (//) ^                                                                                                        Theorem 5.10. (Third Sylow Theorem) IfG is a finite group and p a prime, then the
                                                                                                                                                                                           number of Sylow p-subgroups of G divides \G\ and is of the form kp + 1 for some
                                                                                                                                                                                           k > 0.
Theorem 5.7. (F/m Sylow Theorem) Let G be a group of order p n m, with n > 1, p
prime, and (p,m) =   Then G contains a subgroup of order p /or each 1 < < n and
                                    1 .
                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                          i                                    PROOF. By the second Sylow Theorem the number of Sylow /^-subgroups is the
every subgroup of G of order p (i < n) is normal in some subgroup of order p
                                                                  1          1+1
                                                                                                                                                                                       .   number of conjugates of any one of them, say P. But this number is [G NG (P)], a                           :



                                                                                                                                                                                           divisor of G| by Corollary 4.4. Let S be the set of all Sylow /^-subgroups of G and let
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |       ,




    PROOF. Since p\ \G\, G contains an element a, and therefore, a subgroup (a) of                                                                                                         P act on S by conjugation. Then Q e S if and only if xQx~ = Q for all xeP. The           l




order p by Cauchy's Theorem. Proceeding by induction assume His a subgroup of G                                                                                                            latter condition holds if and only if P < NG (Q). Both P and Q are Sylow /7-subgroups

of order p (1 < / <
           i
                       Then p [G H] and by Lemma 5.5 and Corollary 5.6 H is
                                     a*).                                   :
                                                                                                                                                                                           of G and hence of NG (Q) and are therefore conjugate in NG (Q). But since Q is normal
                                                                                                                                                                                           in NG (Q), this can only occur if Q = P. Therefore, S - {P} and by Lemma 5.1,
                                                                  \




normal in NG (H), H ^ NG (H) and 1 < \NG (H)/H\ = [NG (H) H] = [G H] =                                                                 :                      :



                                                                                                                                                                                           |S| = |S   = 1 (mod/?). Hence |S| = kp + 1.
(mod /?). Hence p \NG (H)/H\ and NG (H)/H contains a subgroup of order p as
                                \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                |




above. By Corollary 1.5.12 this group is of the form Hi/ H where H is a subgroup of                                                        x



NG (H) containing H. Since H                                     is   normal in                   NG (H), H        is   necessarily normal in                                      H x .



Finally \HX    \
                   = \HWHJ H\ = p*p = p i+ K                                                                                                                                               Theorem 5.11. If V is a Sylow p-subgroup of a finite group G, then N G (N G (P))
                                                                                                                                                                                           = N G (P).
    A subgroup P of a group G is said to be a Sylow p-subgroup (p prime) if P is a
maximal ^-subgroup of G (that is, P < H < G with        a /?-group implies P = H).                                 H                                                                          PROOF. Every conjugate of P is a Sylow /7-subgroup of G and of any subgroup
Sylow /^-subgroups always exist, though they may be trivial, and every /7-subgroup                                                                                                         of G that contains it. Since P is normal in TV =                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G (P), P is the only Sylow /7-subgroup
is contained in a Sylow /7-subgroup (Zorn's Lemma is needed to show this for infinite
                                                                                                                                                                                           of       N by Theorem 5.9. Therefore,
96                                   CHAPTER          II       THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                              6.          CLASSIFICATION OF FINITE GROUPS                                                           97



               x s NG (N) => xNx- = N=> xPx~  1                                l
                                                                                   < 7V=> xPx~ = P => x e AT.
                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                          to isomorphism) exactly two distinct groups oforder pq: the cyclic group                                         Zpq and anon-
                                                                                                                                          abelian group    K generated by elements c and d such that
Hence Ng(Ng(P)) < N; the other inclusion is obvious.
                                                                                                                                                                                |c|         = p;         |d|   = q;        dc = c s d,

                                                                                                                                          where s ^ 1 (mod p) and s q = 1 (mod p).
                                                               EXERCISES
 1.   If   N <] G and N, G/N are both /?-groups, then G                                      is   a /?-group.
                                                                                                                                                 SKETCH OF PROOF. A nonabelian group K of order pq as described in the
 2. If     G is a finite /?-group, // <3 G and // ^ <e), then H D C(G) ^ <e).                                                             proposition does exist (Exercise 2). Given G of order pq,                                       G contains elements a,b
                                                                                                                                          with \a\   = p,\b\ = q by Cauchy's Theorem 5.2. Furthermore, S = (a) is normal in G
 3.   Let |G|       = /? n For each k,
                                .                              < k < n, G has a normal subgroup of order p k                          .
                                                                                                                                          (by Corollary 4.10 or by counting Sylow /?-subgroups, as below). The coset bS has
                                                                                                                                          order q in the group G/S. Since \G/S\ = q, G/S is cyclic with generator bS,
 4. If     G is an infinite p-group (p prime), then either G has a subgroup of order p for                                        n

      each n > 1 or there exists w e N* such that every finite subgroup of G has order                                                    G/S = (bS). Therefore every element of G can be written in the form fra j and
      < m                                                                                                                                 G = (a,b).
           P   -




 5.   If P is a normal Sylow /?-subgroup of a finite group                                   G and / G — G is an endo-
                                                                                                              :               >
                                                                                                                                             The number of Sylow ^-subgroups is kq + 1 and divides pq. Hence it is 1 or p. If it
      morphism, then /(P) < P.
                                                                                                                                          is 1(as it must be if q\p — 1), then (b) is also normal in G. Lagrange's Theorem 1.4.6

 6. If // is a normal subgroup of order p
                                                                       k
                                                                           of a finite group G, then // is contained in                   shows that (a) D (b) = (e). Thus by Theorems 1.3.2, 1.8.6, 1.8.10 and Exercise 1.8.5,
      every Sylow /?-subgroup of G.                                                                                                       G = (a) X (b)     =                               ^
                                                                                                                                                               Zp Zq Zpq If the number is p, (which can only occur if
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




                                                                                                                                          p q — 1), then bab' = a r (since (a) <3 G) and r ^ 1 (mod p) (otherwise G would
                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                1


 7.   Find the Sylow 2-subgroups and Sylow 3-subgroups of S 3 S 4 S 5
                                                                                                                                          be abelian by Theorem I.3.4(v) and hence have a unique Sylow ^-subgroup). Since
                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                          ,           ,




 8. If every Sylow /^-subgroup of a finite group                                    G is normal for every prime p, then G                 bab~ l = a\ it follows by induction that b iab~ i = a r \ In particular for j = q,a = a rQ                                      ,



      is   the direct product of its Sylow subgroups.                                                                                     which implies r Q = 1 (mod p) by Theorem 1.3.4 (v).
                                                                                                                                             In order to complete the proof we must show that if q p — 1 and G is the non-            |



 9.   If |G|       = pn   cj,       with p > q primes, then G contains a unique normal subgroup of                                        abelian group described in the preceding paragraph, then G is isomorphic to K. We
      index q.                                                                                                                            shall need some results from number theory. The congruence x q                                           =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1 (mod p) has

                                                                                                                                          exactly q distinct solutions modulo p (see J. E. Shockley [51 ; Corollary 6.1, p. 67]). If
10.   Every group of order 12, 28, 56, and 200 must contain a normal Sylow subgroup,
      and hence is not simple.                                                                                                            r is a solution and k is the least positive integer such that r k                                   = 1 (mod p), then k q   |




                                                                                                                                          (see J.E. Shockley [51 ; Theorem 8, p. 70]). In our case r    (mod p), whence k =       ^       1

      How many elements of order 7 are there in a simple group of order 168?                                                                                             ~
11.                                                                                                                                       q. It follows that 1 ,r,r
                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                      r9,  are all the distinct solutions modulo p of x Q = 1
                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 l



                                                                                                                                          (mod p). Consequently, s = r (mod p) for some / (1 < / < q — 1). If bi = b e G,
                                                                                                                                                                                             l                                                                    l

12.   Show that every automorphism of 5 is an inner automorphism, and hence4
                                                                                                                                          then \bi\ = q. Our work above (with b in place of b) shows that G = (a,bi); that
      5 = Aut 5 [Hint: see Exercise 4.10. Every automorphism of 5 induces a per-
       4                  4.                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           x


                                                                                                                                          every element of G can be written Va'; that    \a\ = /?; and that biabr  *= #aZr'                                  1
      mutation of the set {Pi,P ,P ,P of Sylow 3-subgroups of 5 If /e Aut 5 has
                                                  2        3    4 }                                               4.              4
                                                                                                                                          = a r< = a (Theorem I.3.4(v)). Therefore, b a = a b u Verify that the map G —> K
                                                                                                                                                      s                                                                    s

      f(Pd = P for all then /= 1 S4
                     {                  /,                        .]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y


                                                                                                                                          given by a f- > c and />i —> ^/ is an isomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                    |




13.   Every group G of order p (p prime) is abelian [Hint: Exercise 4.9 and Corollary
                                                  2


      5.4].

                                                                                                                                          Corollary 6.2. Ifp is an odd prime, then every group of order 2p is isomorphic either
                                                                                                                                          to the cyclic group Z 2p or the dihedral group
                                                                                                                                                                                         p                         D   .




6.    CLASSIFICATION OF FINITE GROUPS
                                                                                                                                             PROOF. Apply Proposition 6.1 with q = 2. If G is not cyclic, the conditions on s
   We shall classify up to isomorphism all groups of order pq (p,q primes) and all                                                        implys = -1 (mod p). Hence G = (c d), \d\ = 2, |c| = p, and dc = c^d by
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3

groups of small order (n < 15). Admittedly, these are not very far reaching results;
                                                                                                                                          Theorem I.3.4(v). Therefore, G ^ D p by Theorem 1.6.13.
but even the effort involved in doing this much will indicate the difficulty in deter-
mining the structure of an arbitrary (finite) group. The results of this section are not
needed in the sequel.
                                                                                                                                          Proposition 6.3. 77zere are (up to isomorphism) exactly two distinct nonabelian
                                                                                                                                          groups of order 8: the quaternion group Q 8 and the dihedral group 4                                     D   .




Proposition 6.1. Let p and q be primes such that p > q. // q^p — 1, then every
group of order pq is isomorphic to the cyclic group Z pq Ifq p — 1 then there are (up    .        |
                                                                                                                  ,                              REMARK. The quaternion group Q% is described in Exercise 1.2.3.
98                              CHAPTER                II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                 6.           CLASSIFICATION OF FINITE GROUPS                                                                                                99


     SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.3. Verify that Z) ^ Qs (Exercise 10). If a group G            4                                                           Order                                                     Distinct Groups                                                                              Reference
of order 8 is nonabelian, then it cannot contain an element of order 8 or have every                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                             /fx
                                                                                                                                                                            —w
                                                                                                                                                                           Z k±)Z ^z z ©z z e D
                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 —w
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2,        2                     4,           8,       8,           4       Theorem 2.1 and
nonidentity element of order 2 (Exercise 1.1.13). Hence G contains an element a of                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Proposition 6.3
order 4. The group (a) of index 2 is normal. Choose b (a). Then b e (a) since
                                                                         2
                                                                                                            If                                           9                                                    z 9                                                                                   Exercise 5.13 and
\G/(a)\ = 2. Show that the only possibilities are b2 = a or b2 = e. Since (a) is nor-                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theorem 2.1
mal in G, bab~ e (a); the only possibility is bab~ = a = a~\ It follows that every
                            l                                                           l           3
                                                                                                                                                     10                    Z10, D5                                                                                                                  Corollary 6.2
element of G can be written b*a J Hence G = (a, 6). In one case we have |a| = 4,
                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                     11                    Zn                                                                                                                       Exercise 1.4.3
6 2 = a 2 6a = cr l b, and G
              ,                                ^
                                 Qs by Exercise 1.4.14.; in the other case, \a\ = 4,                                                                 12                    z 0z 2                 6,          Zi 2   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y4 4 ,           Z) 6 ,        7"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theorem 2.1 and
\b\ = 2,ba = ar b and G
                 l
                                              ^
                             Z) 4 by Theorem 1.6.13.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Proposition 6.4
                                                                                                                                                    13                     z    13                                                                                                              Exercise 1.4.3
                                                                                                                                                    14                     Zi 4         ,   Di                                                                                                  Corollary 6.2

Proposition 6.4. 7Vzere are (up to isomorphism) exactly three distinct nonabelian
                                                                                                                                                    15                     zn                                                                                                                   Proposition 6.1

groups of order 12: the dihedral group 6                              D
                                         the alternating group A 4 and a group T
                                                                          ,                                               ,



generated by elements a,b such that |a| = 6, b
                                                                                   2
                                                                                       = a and ba = a _1 b.
                                                                                            3
                                                                                                ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EXERCISES
     SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that there is a group T of order 12 as stated                                                        1 .   Let G and              H be groups and 6                                     :   H — Aut G a homomorphism. Let G X$ //be the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >

(Exercise 5) and that no two of D^A^T are isomorphic (Exercise 6). If G is a non-                                                       set G X H with the following binary operation: (gMg'ft) = (g[d(h)(g')]M').
abelian group of order 12, let P be a Sylow 3-subgroup of G. Then         \P\ = 3 and
                                                                                                                                        Show that GXeH is a group with identity element (e,e) and (g,h)~ =                                                                                                                l


[G   :
         = 4. By Proposition 4.8 there is a homomorphism / G — S whose kernel
         P]                                                                                                      :            4                 l
                                                                                                                                        (6(h- )(g- ),h~ G XeHis called the semidirect product of G and //.
                                                                                                                                                          l       l
                                                                                                                                                                      ).

# is contained in P, whence K = P or (e). \{K = (e), /is a monomorphism and G is
                                                                                                                                        Let Cp = (a) and Cq = (b) be (multiplicative) cyclic groups of prime orders p and
isomorphic to a subgroup of order 12 of S which must be A by Theorem 1.6.8.   4,                                      4
                                                                                                                                  2.

Otherwise K = P and P is normal in G. In this case P is the unique Sylow 3-subgroup.                                                    q respectively such that p > q and q p — 1 Let s be an integer such that s ^ 1                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




Hence G contains only two elements of order 3. If c is one of these, then                                                               (mod p) and s q = 1 (mod /?), which implies s      (mod p). Elementary number                                                      ^
                                                                                                                                        theory shows that such an s exists (see J.E. Shockley [51; Corollary 6.1, p. 67]).
[G CG (c)] = 1 or 2 since [G CG (c)] is the number of conjugates of c and every con-
     :                                             :




jugate of c has order 3. Hence CG (c) is a group of order 12 or 6. In either case there
                                                                                                                                          (a)  The map a                                Q
                                                                                                                                                                —> Cp given by a |— a si is an automorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {




is d e Cg(c) of order 2 by Cauchy's Theorem. Verify that \cd\ = 6.
                                                                                                                                          (b) The map      :Cq ^> Aut Cp given by 0(#) = a (a as in part (a)) is a homo-                                                            1




                                                                                                                                        morphism (a = l Cp).
                                                                                                                                           (c) If we write a for (a,e) and b for (e,6), then the group Cp Xe Cq (see Exer-
    Let a = cd\ then (a) is normal in G and |G/(a)| = 2. Hence there is an element
                                                                                                                                         cise 1) is a group of order pq, generated by a and b subject to the relations:
b e G such that 6 $ (a), b 5* e, b 2 e (a), and foZr £ (a). Since G is nonabelian and
                                                    1

                                                                                                                                         \a\ = /?, \b\ = q,ba = a 6, where 5
\a\ = 6, foZr
               1            -1
                 = a = a is the only possibility; that is,
                     b                                           =       There are six
                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                                                               ^ 1 (mod /?), and s q 2= 1 (mod /?). The group
                                                                                                                                         Cp          C is called the metacyclic group.
possibilities for b2 £ (a), b2 = a or b = a lead to contradictions; b = a or b = a
                                                                                                                                                          r/
                                  2     2    4                         2        2    5


imply |6| = 12 and G abelian. Therefore, the only possibilities are                                                               3.    Consider the set G =  ±l,±i,±/,±fc} with multiplication given by i 2 = y' 2 = k 2
                                                                                                                                                                                             {


    (i) \a\ = 6; b = e;
                  2       =       whence G      Z> 6 by Theorem 1.6.13;     =                                                           = —1;        (/        = k\ jk — —k, kj = — /, ik = —j, and the usual rules
                                                                                                                                                                                            /,   ^/ = j; ji =
     (ii)         \a\   = 6; 62 = a   3
                                          ;        = a" ^,  1
                                                                    whence G = T by Exercise 5(b).                                      for multiplying by ±1. Show that G is a group isomorphic to the quaternion
                                                                                                                                        group Q s         .




    The table below lists (up to isomorphism) all distinct groups of small order. There                                           4.    What is the center of the quaternion group Q{1 Show that Qs/C(Q S) is abelian.
are 14 distinct groups of order 16 and 51 of order 32; see M. Hall and J.K. Senior
[16]. There is no known formula giving the number of distinct groups of order n,
                                                                                                                                  5.     (a) Show that there is a nonabelian subgroup T of 5 3 X Z4 of order 1 2 generated
for every n.
                                                                                                                                         by elements a,b such that \a\ = 6, a 3 = b 2 ba = a~ b.                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l



                                                                                                                                         (b) Any group of order 12 with generators a,b such that \a\ = 6, a z = b2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                                                                                         ba = a~ l b is isomorphic to T.
                  Order                            Distinct Groups                                                   Reference
                        1       (e)                                                                                               6.    No two of D A            6,        A,       and T are isomorphic, where T is the group of order 12 de-
                        2       Z2
                                                                                                            Exercise 1.4.3              scribed in Proposition 6.4 and Exercise 5.
                        3       Z3                                                                          Exercise 1.4.3
                                                                                                                                  7. If   G is a nonabelian group of order p (p prime), then the center of G is the sub-                         3

                        4       Z 0Z Z
                                 2            2,       4                                                    Exercise 1.4.5
                                                                                                                                        group generated by all elements of the form aba~ l b~ l (a,b e G).
                        5       Z5                                                                          Exercise 1.4.3
                        6       Z Aj
                                 6,                                                                         Corollary 6.2         8.    Let p be an odd prime. Prove that there are, at most, two nonabelian groups of
                        7       Z7                                                                          Exercise 1.4.3              order p 3    .         [One has generators a,b satisfying                                                                          \a\      = p2        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \b\   = p\ b~ ab = a 1+p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;
100                           CHAPTER    II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                               7.   NILPOTENT AND SOLVABLE GROUPS                            101



      the other has generators a,b,c satisfying              \a\   = \b\ = \c\ = p\ c = a   l
                                                                                                b x ab\      PROOF. G and all its nontrivial quotients are /^-groups, and therefore, have non-
      ca = ac; cb = be]                                                                                   trivial centers by Corollary 5.4. This implies that if  G ^ C(G), then C(G) is strictly
                                                                                                          contained in Ct+1 (G). Since G is finite, Cn (G) must be G for some n.
 9.   Classify up to isomorphism all groups of order 18. Do the same for orders 20
      and 30.
                                                                                                          Theorem 7.3. The direct product of a finite number of nilpotent groups is nilpotent.
10.   Show that Z> 4 is not isomorphic to (? 8 [Him: Count elements of order 2.]
                                                       .




                                                                                                              PROOF. Suppose for convenience that G = H X K, the proof for more than
                                                                                                          two    factors being similar. Assume inductively that Q(G) = G(H) X 0(K) (the
                                                                                                          case   = 1 is obvious). Let irH be the canonical epimorphism H ^> H/d(H) and
                                                                                                                 /
7.    NILPOTENT AND SOLVABLE GROUPS                                                                       similarly for ir K Verify that the canonical epimorphism <p G — G/G(G) is the
                                                                                                                            .                                               :     >


                                                                                                          composition
      Consider the following conditions on a finite group G.

       (i)    G    is   the direct product of its Sylow subgroups.                                        G =    HXK^ H/OiH) X K/0(K)                                   =
                                                                                                                                                                                HXK    = G/C(G),
                                                                                                                                                                                          1  %K h
      (ii)    //   m divides |G|, then G      has a subgroup of order m.                                                                                  0(H)XO(K)         0(HXK)
      (iii)   If\G\      = mn with (m,n) = 1, then G has a subgroup of order m.                           where 7r = t h X ir K (Theorem 1. 8. 10), and \p is the isomorphism of Corollary 1. 8.11.
                                                                                                          Consequently,
Conditions (ii) and (iii) may be considered as modifications of the First Sylow Theo-
rem. It is not difficult to show that (i) => (ii) and obviously (ii) => (iii). The fact that                                    Ci+i(G) = (p' l [C(G/0(.G))} = tt-^-i[C(G/C(G))]
every finite abelian group satisfies (i) is an easy corollary of Theorem 2.2. Every p-                                                   = ir-i[C(H/G(H) X K/0(K))]
group satisfies (i) trivially. On the other hand, A 4 satisfies (iii) but not (ii), and 5 3
                                                                                                                                         = ir-i[C(H/G(H)) X C(K/OiK))]
satisfies (ii) but not (i) (Exercise 1). Given the rather striking results achieved thus
                                                                                                                                         = irH ' [aH/0(H))} X tt k-i[C(K/G(K))}
                                                                                                                                              l

far with finite abelian and /^-groups, the classes of groups satisfying (i), (ii), and (iii)
respectively would appear to be excellent candidates for investigation.              We shall re-                                        = + i(H) X + x(K).
strict our attention to those groups that satisfy (i) or (iii).
                                                                                                          Thus the inductive step is proved and 0(G) = d(H) X 0(K) for all /. Since H,K
      We shall first define nilpotent and solvable groups in terms of certain "normal                     are nilpotent, there exists n e N* such that      Cn (H) = H and O(K) = K, whence
series" of subgroups. In the case of finite groups, nilpotent groups are characterized
                                                                                                          0(G) = H X K = G. Therefore, G is nilpotent.
by condition (i) (Proposition 7.5) and solvable ones by condition (iii) (Proposition
7.14). This approach will also demonstrate that there is a connection between nil-
potent and solvable groups and commutativity. Other characterizations of nilpotent
                                                                                                          Lemma 7.4. //H is a proper subgroup of a nilpotent group G, then       H is a proper sub-
and solvable groups are given in Section 8.
                                                                                                          group of its normalizer Ng(H).
      Our treatment of solvable groups is purely group theoretical. Historically, how-
ever, solvable groups first occurred in connection with the problem of determining
the roots of a polynomial with coefficients in a field (see Section V.9).
                                                                                                             PROOF. Let C (G) = (e) and let n be the largest index such that Cn (G) < H\
   Let G be a group. The center C(G) of G is a normal subgroup (Corollary 4.7).
                                                                                                                                 G is nilpotent and Ha proper subgroup). Choose a e Cn+ i(G)
                                                                                                          (there is such an n since
                                                                                                          with a f H. Then for every h e H, Oah = (Cn a)(Cn h) = (Cn h)(Cn a) = Oka in
Let C2 (G) be the inverse image of C(G/C(G)) under the canonical projection
                                                                                                          G/CrlG) since Cn a is in the center by the definition of C+i(G). Thus ah = h'ha,
G -* G/C(G). Then by (the proof of) Theorem 1.5.1 1 C2 (G) is normal in G and con-
                                                                               = C(G) and 0(G)            where h' e Cn (G) < H. Hence aha~ e H and a e NG (H). Since a H, H is a proper
                                                                                                                                                  l

tains C(G). Continue this process by defining inductively: C\(G)                                                                                                          $

is the inverse image of C(G/0-\(G)) under the canonical projection G
                                                                     —> G/G-\(G).                         subgroup of   NG (H).
Thus we obtain a sequence of normal subgroups of G, called the ascending central
series of G: (e)           < d(G) < C (G) <
                                         2

                                                                                                          Proposition 7.5. A finite group is nilpotent ifand only if it is the direct product of its
                                                                                                          Sylow subgroups.

Definition 7.1.             A group G is nilpotent //C n (G) = G for some n.
                                                                                                             PROOF. If G is the direct product of its Sylow /7-subgroups, then G is nilpotent
                                                                                                          by Theorems 7.2 and 7.3. If G is nilpotent and P is a Sylow /^-subgroup of G for some
      Every abelian group G is nilpotent since G = C(G) = Ci(G).                                          prime p, then either P = G (and we are done) or P is a proper subgroup of G. In the
                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                    P is a proper subgroup of G (P) by Lemma 7.4. Since G (P) is its own
                                                                                                          latter case                                                              N
                                                                                                          normalizer by Theorem 5.1 1, we must have         N
                                                                                                                                                      G (P) = G by Lemma 7.4. Thus P is
Theorem 7.2. Every finite p-group is nilpotent.                                                           normal in G, and hence the unique Sylow /^-subgroup of G by Theorem 5.9. Let
                                                                                                                                                                                          .




102                                                 CHAPTER                               II           THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                                                                    7.           NILPOTENT AND SOLVABLE GROUPS                                                                    103


|G| = /?i n i- -p k nk (pi distinct primes, «* > 0) and let Pi,P2
                             •                                          ,Pk be the corre-                                                                                             ,   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF. Since by the definition of C(G) C {G)/Q-i(G) = CiG/Q^G)) is                                           t


sponding (proper normal) Sylow subgroups of G. Since                   = pi ni for each /,                                                                                                                                          abelian,  C(G)' < d^(G) for all > 1 and G(G)' = C(G)' = (e). For some n,/

Pi fl Pj = (e) for / ^ j. By Theorem 1.5.3 xy = yx for every x e i\, y e P, (/ ^ j).                                                                                                                                                G = Cn (G). Therefore, C(G/Cn ^(G)) = Cn {G)/Cn ^{G) = G/Cn ^(G) is abelian
It follows that for each /, PiP2                  Pk is a subgroup in which every element  •                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and hence G     = G' < Cn _t(G). Therefore, G™ = G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            < Cn _i(G)' < Cn _ (G);                                            (1)/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                              nk Consequently, Pi fl (P
has order dividing /?i ni                                                                                                                                                                                                           similarly G   < C„_ (G)' < Cn _ (G);
                                                                                                       1
                               /^rW+i     'P*                 -   •
                                                                        r •           -P*)                 '   *
                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                      •               •                                (3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             G<«~» < C (G)' < d(G); G<»> < G(G)'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                         3           .   .   .   ,                        2

= <£?> and PiP -P = Pi X   X Pk Since |G| = p^- •/>*»* =\P X---XPk
                                        2
                                            -   •
                                                        fc
                                                                                            •      •   •
                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = (e). Hence G is solvable.
= Pi -P we must have G = PiP -P* = Pi X
      |
            •   •
                         fc |
                                            X Pk                                                                   2       •                            •    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Theorem 7.11. (i) Every subgroup and every homomorphic image of a solvable group
Corollary 7.6.                          //G             /'s       « y?/iz7e nilpotent group and                                                        m divides \G\, //ze« G                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is solvable.
grow/? of order m.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (ii)   //N is a normal subgroup ofa group G such that N and G/N are solvable, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G        is solvable.
          PROOF. Exercise.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) If / G -> H is a homomorphism [epimorphism],   :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      < H^[f(G^) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   verify that /«?<»">)                 for all Suppose /is an epimorphism, and
Definition 7.7. Le/                                          G be a group. The subgroup of G generated by the set                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /.



{aba^b              -1
                                 a,b e Gj               zs                                //ze         commutator subgroup ofG and denoted G'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G is solvable. Then for some n, (e) = /(e) = /(G >) =                                                       (7l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      whence   H   is solvable.
                         |

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The proof for a subgroup is similar.

          The elements abar b~                               l            l
                                                                                  (a,b s G) are called commutators. The commutators only
generate G', so that G' may well contain elements that are not commutators.  G is                                                                                                                                                           (ii)   Let /   :   G — G/N be the canonical epimorphism. Since G/N is solvable, for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >


abelian if and only if G' = (e). In a sense, G' provides a measure of how much G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   some n /(G<">) = (G/ N) (n) = (e). Hence G™ < Ker /=                                                                             M Since G<»>   is   solvable

differs from an abelian group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   by       (i),   there exists               A:       e       N* such that                 G< n+ *>      = (G (n) )         (fc)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = <<?}. Therefore, G is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   solvable.



Theorem 7.8. IfG is a group, then G' is a normal subgroup ofG and G/ G' is abelian.
//N is a normal subgroup ofG, then G/N is abelian if and only z'/N contains G'.                                                                                                                                                    Corollary 7.12. Ifn > 5, //z*?az Me symmetric group S„ zs /zor solvable.


          PROOF. Let / G — G be any automorphism. Then
                                                    :                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF. If S n were solvable, then ^ n would be solvable. Since A n is nonabelian,
                                                        f(aba-ib-i) = f(a)f(b)f(ar f(b)-                                                           i                     1
                                                                                                                                                                             £ G'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A n ^ (1). Since A n is normal in A n (Theorem 7.8) and A n is simple (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '                                 '



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.6.10), we must have A n = A n Therefore A n  = A n ^ (1) for all > 1, whence A n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /

It follows that /(G')< G' In particular, if /is the automorphism given by conjuga-.                                                                                                                                                is   not solvable.
tion by as G, then aG'ar = f(G') < G', whence G' is normal in G by Theorem 1.5.1.
                                                                      1



Since (ab)(ba)~ = aba~ b- e G\ abG' = baG' and hence G/G' is abelian. If G/N is
                                    l                             l                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NOTE. The remainder of this section is not needed in the sequel.
abelian, then #/37V = /3#7V for all #,6 £ G, whence ab(ba)~ l                                                                                                                             = aba~ b~ e TV. There-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      l   l



fore, TV contains all commutators and G'                                                                                               < N. The converse is easy.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      In order to prove a generalization of the Sylow theorems for finite solvable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   groups (as mentioned in the first paragraph of this section) we need some definitions
          Let G be a group and let G (1 be G' Then for / >                                     >
                                                                                                                                                            1, define                     G^ by G<»> = (G^)'-
G   (i)
           is   called /th derived subgroup of G. This gives a sequence of subgroups of G,
                                                                                                                       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   and a lemma. A subgroup                   H of a group G is said to be characteristic [resp. fully in-
each normal in the preceding one: G >                                                                                                  G   (1)
                                                                                                                                                 > G   (2)
                                                                                                                                                                 >   •       •.           Actually each       G   {i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   variant] if /(//)                 < H for every automorphism [resp. endomorphism] / G — G.                                                       :       >

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Clearly every fully invariant subgroup is characteristic and every characteristic sub-
normal subgroup of G (Exercise 13).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   group is normal (since conjugation is an automorphism). A minimal normal subgroup
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of a group          G is a nontrivial normal subgroup that contains no proper subgroup
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   which is normal in G.
Definition 7.9.                                 A group G is said to be solvable z/G (n) = (e) for some n.

          Every abelian group is trivially solvable. More generally, we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lemma 7.13. Let N be a normal subgroup of a finite group G and H any sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   group ofG.

Proposition 7.10. Every nilpotent group is solvable.                                                                                                                                                                                         (i)   IfH is a characteristic subgroup o/N, then H is normal in G.
104                      CHAPTER             II       THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                            7.       NILPOTENT AND SOLVABLE GROUPS                                             105



      (ii)    Every normal Sylow ^-subgroup ofG is fully invariant.                                         order m/m\. By induction they are conjugate: for some X- e G/H (where x is the coset
      (iii)   IfGis solvable and N is a minimal normal subgroup, then N is an abelian p-                    of xeG), x(HB/F1)x                l
                                                                                                                                                  = HC/H. It follows that xHBx~ = HC. Consequently  l



group for some prime p.                                                                                     xBx~ and C are subgroups of HC of order m and are therefore conjugate in HC by
                                                                                                                 l




                                                                                                            induction. Hence B and C are conjugate in G.
   PROOF, (i) Since aNa' = N for all a e G, conjugation by a is an automor-
                                     1                                                                         (iii) If a subgroup AT of G has order & dividing m, then HK/H Ay// D AT has                  ^
phism of N. Since H is characteristic in TV, aHcr < H for all a e G. Hence H is                            order dividing k. Since HK/H is a subgroup of G///, its order also divides \G/H\
                                                                        1




normal in G by Theorem 1.5.1.                                                                               = (m/mi)(n/m). (k,n) = 1 implies that the order of HK/H divides w/wi. By induc-
                                                                                                           tion there is a subgroupA/H of G/H of order m/m\ which contains HK/H (where
      (ii) is an exercise, (iii) It is easy to see that N' is fully invariant in TV, whence N' is
                                                                                                           A < G as above). Clearly K is a subgroup of A. Since A = \H\\A/H\ = wi«i(m/wi)
                                                                                                                                                                                        |   \




normal in G by (i). Since TV is a minimal normal subgroup, either TV' = (e) or
                                                                                                           = mm < mn, K is contained in a subgroup of A (and hence of G) of order m by in-
TV' = TV. Since TV is solvable (Theorem 7.11), TV' ^ TV. Hence TV' = (e) and TV is a
                                                                                                           duction.

nontrivial abelian group. Let P be a nontrivial    Sylow /^-subgroup of TV for some
prime p. Since TV is abelian, P is normal in TV and hence fully invariant in TV by (ii).                       CASE 2. Every proper normal subgroup of G has order divisible by n. If // is a
Consequently P is normal in G by (i). Since TV is minimal and P nontrivial we must                         minimal normal subgroup (such groups exist since G is finite), then \H\ = p r for
have P = TV.                                                                                               some prime p by Lemma 7.13 (iii). Since (m,n) = 1 and n\\H\, it follows that
                                                                                                           n — p r and hence that        H
                                                                                                                                      is a Sylow /^-subgroup of G. Since // is normal in G, // is the

                                                                                                           unique Sylow /^-subgroup of G. This argument shows that              is the only minimal H
Proposition 7.14.            {P. Hall)       Let       G be a finite solvable group of order mn, with      normal subgroup of G (otherwise n = p r and n = q s for distinct primes /?,<:/). In par-
                                                                                                           ticular, every nontrivial normal subgroup ofG contains H.
(m,n) = 1. Then

        (i)    G contains a subgroup of order m;                                                               (i) Let AT be a normal subgroup of G such that K/H is a minimal normal sub-
         any two subgroups ofG of order m are conjugate;
       (ii)
                                                                                                           group of G/H (Corollary 1.5.12). By Lemma 7.13 (iii) \K/H\ = q s (q prime, q ^ /?),
   (iii) any subgroup of G of order k, where k   m, is contained in a subgroup of
order m.
                                                                    |




                                                                                                           so that \K\ = p rq s Let 5 be a Sylow (/-subgroup of K and let
                                                                                                                                 .                                          be the normalizer of S  M
                                                                                                           in G. We shall show that \M\ = m. Since //is normal in K, HS is a subgroup of AT.
                                                                                                           Clearly// f) S = (e) so that |//5| = |//||5|/|// D 5| = p rq s = \K\, whence # = //S.
      REMARKS. If m is a prime power, this theorem merely restates several results                             Since AT is normal in G and 5 < K, every conjugate of S in G lies in K. Since
contained in the Sylow theorems. P. Hall has also proved the converse of (i): if G is a                    5 is a Sylow subgroup of K, all these subgroups are already conjugate in K. Let
finite group such that whenever G\ = mn with (m,n) = 1 G has a subgroup of order
                                                  |
                                                                                ,
                                                                                                           N     N
                                                                                                              = K (S); then the number c of conjugates of 5 in G is [G M] = [K N] by                    :       :



m, then G is solvable. The proof is beyond the scope of this book (see M. Hall [15;                        Corollary 4.4. Since S <                N
                                                                                                                                             < K, K >                      HN
                                                                                                                                                             > HS = K, so that K =            and               HN
p. 143]).                                                                                                  c = [G M] = [K N] = [HN N] = [H
                                                                                                                     :               :                     :f) N]  (Corollary 1.5.9). We shall
                                                                                                                                                                           :H
                                                                                                           show that       H
                                                                                                                          f)     N
                                                                                                                                = (e), which implies c = \H\ = p T and hence \M\ = |G|/[G M]                            :




      PROOF OF 7.14. The proof proceeds by induction on |G|, the orders < 5                                = mp r /p r = m. We do this by showing first that       f)               H
                                                                                                                                                                          < C(K) and second thatN
being trivial. There are two cases.                                                                        cm =          <*>.
                                                                                                               Let x e       H   N and &           £ AT.       Since   K = HS, k = hs (h e H, s e S). Since //              is

      CASE 1. There is a proper normal subgroup H of G whose order is not divisible                        abelian (Lemma 7.13 (iii)) and x e H, we need only show xs = sx in order to have

by n.                                                                                                      xk = kx and x e C(K). Now (xsx'^sr eS since x e N = NK (S). But xUrt" ) e //
                                                                                                                                                                       1                                            1



                                                                                                           since x s     H
                                                                                                                      and // is normal in G. Thus xsx^s' e H f) S = (e), which implies
                                                                                                                                                                                    1




           = minx, where nn m,m n,<xndm < n. G/H is a solvable group of order                              xs = sx.
      (i)     \m\
                                                                                                                                       C(K) is a characteristic subgroup of K. Since K is normal in
                                         \             \




(m/nn)(n/n\) < mn, with (m/m u n/m) = 1. Therefore by induction G/H contains a
                                                                                                               It is easy to see that


subgroup A/H of order (m/nn) (where A is a subgroup of G — see Corollary 1.5.12).                                                                                  ^ (e), then C(K) necessarily con-
                                                                                                           G, C(AT) is normal in G by Lemma 7.13 (i). If C(K)

                                     = mm < mn. A is solvable (Theorem 7.11)                               contains H. This together with K = HS implies that S is normal in K. By Lemma
Then \A\ = \H\[A H] =    :


                                                                                                           7.13 (ii) and (i) S is fully invariant in K and hence normal in G (since K < G). This
and by induction contains a subgroup of order m.
   (ii) Suppose B,C are subgroups of G of order m. Since H is normal in G, HB is a
                                                                                                           implies   H  < S which is a contradiction. Hence C{K) = (e).
subgroup (Theorem 1.5.3), whose order k necessarily divides \G\ = mn. Since
                                                                                                               (ii) Let     M
                                                                                                                           be as in (i) and suppose B is a subgroup of G of order m. Now           is

                                                                                                           divisible by \B\ = m and \K\ = z?^ 5 Since (m,p) = 1, |2MT| is divisible by p Tm = /zw
k = |//£| - \H\\B\/\H H B\ = immm/\H          B\,   we have A|// fl £| = wi/iiw,                                                                                 .




                              =                integers x,y such that mix + ny = 1,
                                                                                                           = |G|. Hence G -            Consequently G/K = BK/K^B/B f) K (Corollary 1.5.9),
whence A: nnmm. Since            1, there are
                                                                                                           which implies that \B D K\ = \B\/\G/K\ = q s By the Second Sylow Theorem
                    |




and hence mmrmx + wm^y = mm. Consequently k mm. By Lagrange's Theorem       \
                                                                                                                                                                                .




                                                implies mm                  =                              B D K is conjugate to S in K. Furthermore B D K is normal in B (since K < G) and
1.4.6 m = \B\ and nnm = \H\ divide k. Thus    1                                         \
                                                                                            k. Therefore
                                                                                                           hence # is contained in 7Vg(£ H K). Verify that conjugate subgroups have conjugate
k = mm; similarly \HC\ = mm. Thus HB/H and HC/H are subgroups of G/H of
106                             CHAPTER   II           THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                            8.       NORMAL AND SUBNORMAL SERIES                                                               107



normalizers.           NG (B fl K) and NG (S) = M are conjugate in G. Thus
                         Hence                                                                               9.     Show that the commutator subgroup of 5                                                 4       is        A   A.   What is the commutator
\NG (B          = |M|
                   K)\=  w. But |£| = m; therefore B < NG (B H #) implies                                           group of Ap.
5 = NG (B fl #). Hence B and M are conjugate.                                                            10.       S n is solvable for n < 4, but 5 and 5 4 are not nilpotent.  3
   (iii) Let D < G, where |Z>| =        and k m. Let M(of order m) and // (of order
                                                           A:       \




p\ with (/>,/w) = 1) be as in  (i). Then  D Ci H = (e) and \DH\ = \D\\H\/\D fl H\                        11. A nontrivial finite solvable group G contains a normal abelian subgroup
= Jfc/T. We also have |G| =                 M H = (e) and M// = G (since                                           H 5* (e). If G                    is   not solvable then G contains a normal subgroup 7/ such that
|M//| = |M||//|/|M       H\ = mp = |G|). Hence M(DH) = G and therefore
                                                       r
                                                                                                                    H' = //.
\M fl Z)//| = \M\\DH\/\MDH\ = m(kp )/mp = k. Let A/* = M H Z)//;thenM*
                                                                r       r

                                                                                                         12.       There is no group G such that G' = S 4 [Hint: Exercises 9 and 5.12 may be
and Z) are conjugate (by (ii) applied to the group DH). For some a e G, aM^a' = D.
                                                                                               1                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                   helpful.]
Since M* < M, D is contained in aMa~\ a conjugate of M, and thus a subgroup of
order                                                                                                    13. If      G is a group, then the zth derived subgroup G                                                     (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is a fully invariant subgroup,

                                                                                                                   whence G is normal.       (l)



      We close this section by mentioning a longstanding conjecture of Burnside: every
     group of odd order is solvable. This remarkable result was first proved by
finite
                                                                                                         14. If          N < G and N                      C\   G' = <<?), then                W < C(G).
W. Feit and J. Thompson [61] in 1963.                                                                    15. If 7/ is a maximal proper subgroup of a finite solvable group G, then [G : H) is a
                                                                                                                   prime power.

                                                                                                         16.       For any group G, C(G) is characteristic, but not necessarily fully invariant.
                                                           EXERCISES
                                                                                                        17. If           G is an abelian /?-group, then the subgroup G[p] (see Lemma 2.5) is fully in-
 1.   (a) Ai is not the direct product of its Sylow subgroups, but A A does have the                               variant in G.
      property: mn = 12 and (m,n) = 1 imply there is a subgroup of order m.
      (b)     5 3 has subgroups of orders 1, 2, 3, and 6 but is not the direct product of its           18. If           G is a finite nilpotent group, then every minimal normal subgroup of G is con-
      Sylow subgroups.                                                                                             tained in C(G) and has prime order.


      Let G be a group and a,b e G. Denote the commutator aba~ b~ £ G by [a,b].
                                                                                 x   Y
 2.

      Show that for any a,b,c, e G, [ab,c] = a[b,c]a~ [a,c].
                                                                            l




 3.   IfHand K are subgroups of a group G, let (H,K) be the subgroup of G generated
                                                                                                        8.     NORMAL AND SUBNORMAL SERIES
      by the elements {hkh^k' \heH,keK}. Show that
                                          1
                                                                                                               The usefulness of the ascending central series and the series of derived subgroups
             (a)   (H,K) is normal in     H V K.                                                        of a group suggests that other such series of subgroups should be investigated. We do
                         = (e), then (Z/',G) = (e).
             (b) If (H,G')                                                                              this next and obtain still other characterizations of nilpotent and solvable groups, as
             (c)   H< G   and only if (H,G) < H.
                                if                                                                      well as the famous theorem of Jordan-Holder.
             (d) Let K < G and K < H\ then H/K < C(G/K) if and only if (//,G) < K.

                                                          G as follows: Yi(G) = G                       Definition 8.1.                            A subnormal series of a group G is a chain of subgroups G = G >
 4.   Define a chain of subgroups 7i(G) of a group                                                  >



        (G) = (G,G), 7i(G) = (7i_i(G),G) (see Exercise 3). Show that G is nilpotent if                  Gi >         •   •   •
                                                                                                                                     > G„ such that G i+ is normal in Gi for
                                                                                                                                                                     i                                             <    i    < n. The factors of the series
      7  2
                                                                                                        are the quotient groups Gi/Gi+i. The length of the series is the number of strict inclu-
      and only if y m (G) = (e) for some m.
                                                                                                        sions (or alternatively, the number ofnonidentity factors). A subnormal series such that
 5.   Every subgroup and every quotient group of a nilpotent group is nilpotent.                        Gi is normal in G for all                              i   is said to       be normal. 5
      [Hint: Theorem 7.5 or Exercise 4.].
                                                                                                               A subnormal series need not be normal (Exercise 1.5.10).
 6.   (Wielandt) Prove that a finite group G is nilpotent if and only if every maximal
      proper subgroup of G is normal. Conclude that every maximal proper subgroup                          EXAMPLES. The derived series G > G >           > G is a normal series for                 (1)       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (n)


      has prime index. [Hint: if P is a Sylow /^-subgroup of G, show that any subgroup                  any groupG (see Exercise 7.13). If G is nilpotent, the ascending central series
      containing          N
                   G (P) is its own normalizer; see Theorem 5.11.]                                      Ci(G) <  < Cn (G) = G is a normal series for G.
                                                                                                                                 •   •   •




 7.   If Wis a nontrivial normal subgroup of a nilpotent group G, then           N   fl   C(G) ^ (e).

 8.   If     D n is the dihedral group with generators a of order n and 6 of order 2, then              Definition 8.2. Let                           G = G > Gi >                    •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                  > G n be a subnormal series. A one-step re-
             (a)  a £ Dn
                    2      '.
                                                                                                        finement of this series is any series of the form                                           G = G >->Gi>N> G i+ >                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •    •




             (b) If w is odd, D n '^Zn         .




             (c) If n is even, ZV =ZW where 2m = w.,



             (d) Z) n is nilpotent if and only if az is a power of 2.
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                   Some authors use the terms "normal" where we use "subnormal."
108                           CHAPTER      II     THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                              8.   NORMAL AND SUBNORMAL SERIES                                                        109


> G or G = G >
           n         > G n > N, where N a normal subgroup ofGi and (ifi < n)
                               •   •
                                                                  is                                                                        \G\      = pq (p > q primes), then G contains an element a of order p and (a) is normal
G i+ normal in N. A refinement of a subnormal series S is any subnormal series ob-
      i    is                                                                                                                              in       G (Corollary 4.10). Thus G > (a) > (e) is a solvable series and G is solvable.
tained from S by a finite sequence of one-step refinements. A refinement ofS is said to                                                    More generally we have
be proper if its length is larger than the length ofS.


                                                                                                                                           Proposition 8.6.         A finite group G is solvable ifand only ifG has a composition series
Definition 8.3.     A subnormal series G = G > Gi >           > G n = (e) is a composi-                                                    whose factors are cyclic of prime order.
tion series if each factor G /G l+ is simple. A subnormal series G = G > Gi >
                                       t    i                                        >                                •   •   •




G n = (e) is a solvable series if each factor is abelian.                                                                                       PROOF. A (composition) series with cyclic factors is a solvable series. Con-
                                                                                                                                           versely, assume    G = G > Gi >     > G n = (e) is a solvable series for G. If G 5* Gi,
                                                                                                                                                                                    •   •   •




   The following fact is used frequently when dealing with composition series: if TV is                                                    let Hi be a maximal normal subgroup of G = G which contains Gi. If Hi 5* G u let

a normal subgroup of a group G, then every normal subgroup of G/ N is of the form                                                          H be a maximal normal subgroup of M which contains Gi, and so on. Since G is
                                                                                                                                                2


H/N where //is a normal subgroup of G which contains TV (Corollary 1.5.12). There-                                                         finite, this gives a series G > H > H >
                                                                                                                                                                                Y      > Hk > Gi with each subgroup a maxi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •




fore, when G ^ TV, G/N is simple if and only if TV is a maximal in the set of all                                                          mal normal subgroup of the preceding, whence each factor is simple. Doing this for
normal subgroups M of G with M ^ G (such a subgroup N is called a maximal                                                                  each pair (G„G1+ i) gives a solvable refinement G =                    N > Ni>         -   •   •> N = (e) ofr

normal subgroup of G).                                                                                                                     the original series by Theorem 8.4 (ii). Each factor of this series is abelian and simple
                                                                                                                                           and hence cyclic of prime order (Exercise 1.4.3). Therefore, G >                       M>      •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > N = (e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r

                                                                                                                                           is   a composition series.

Theorem 8.4. (i) Every finite group G has a composition series.
          (ii)   Every refinement of a solvable series is a solvable series.                                                                        A given group may have many subnormal or solvable series. Likewise it may have
      (iii)      A subnormal series is a composition series if and only if it has no proper re-                                            several different composition series (Exercise 1). However we shall now show that

finements.                                                                                                                                 any two composition series of a group are equivalent in the following sense.


      PROOF, (i) Let Gi be a maximal normal subgroup of G; then G/Gi is simple by
Corollary 1.5.12. Let G 2 be a maximal normal subgroup of Gi, and so on. Since G is                                                        Definition 8.7. Two subnormal series S andT ofa group                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                        are equivalent if there is a
finite, this process must end with G n = (e). Thus G > G\ >       > G n = (e) is a           •   •   •
                                                                                                                                           one-to-one correspondence between the nontrivial factors of Sand the nontrivial factors
composition series.                                                                                                                        ofT such that corresponding factors are isomorphic groups.
      (ii)       If Gi/d+i is abelian and       G i+ < H <\ Gi, then H/Gi+ is abelian since it is a
                                                      i                               i



subgroup of Gi/Gi+i and d/H is abelian since it is isomorphic to the quotient                                                                       Two subnormal series need not have the same number of terms in order to be
(Gi/G i+ i)/(H/Gi+\) by the Third Isomorphism Theorem 1.5.10. The conclusion now                                                           equivalent, but they must have the same length (that is, the same number of non-
follows immediately.                                                                                                                       trivial factors). Clearly, equivalence of subnormal series is an equivalence relation.
      (iii)      If    Gi+ < H < d are groups, then H/G i+ is a proper normal subgroup of
                          i                                                i




Gi/Gi+i and every proper normal subgroup of G /G l+ has this form by Corollary
                                                                       t       i


      The conclusion now follows from the observation that a subnormal series
1.5.12.                                                                                                                                    Lemma 8.8. IfS is a composition series of a group G, then any refinement ofS is
G = Go > Gi >     > Gn = (e) has a proper refinement if and only if there is a                                                             equivalent to S.
subgroup H such that for some  Gi+ <\ H <\ d.   /',
                                                          i



                                                                                                                                                    PROOF. Let S      be denoted                G = G > d >   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          > G n = (e). By Theorem
                                                                                                                                           8.4 (iii) S has no proper refinements. This implies that the only possible refinements
                                                                                                                                           of S are obtained by inserting additional copies of each Gt Consequently any re-
Theorem 8.5. A group G is solvable if and only if it has a solvable series.                                                                                                                                                   .




                                                                                                                                           finement of S has exactly the same nontrivial factors as S and is therefore equivalent

      PROOF. If G is solvable, then the derived series G > G                          (1 >
                                                                                             > G™ >     > G                       (   »>
                                                                                                                                           to S.        m
= (e) is a solvable series by Theorem 7.8. If G = G > d >                                    •
                                                                                               > G n = (e) is a
                                                                                                 •



                                                                                                                                                    The next lemma is quite technical. Its value will be immediately apparent in the
solvable series for G, then    G/Gi abelian implies that Gi > G (1) by Theorem 7.8;
                                                                                                                                           proof of Theorem 8.10.
Gi/G 2 abelian implies G 2 > G/ > G (2) Continue by induction and conclude that
                                                              .




Gi > G    for all /; in particular (e) = G n > G (n) and G is solvable.
                 (t)




      EXAMPLES. The dihedral group D n is solvable since D n > (a) > (e) is a solv-                                                        Lemma 8.9. (Zassenhaus) Let A*, A, B*, B k subgroups of a group G such that A*
able series, where a is the generator of order n (so that                          D n /(a) ^Z           2 ).   Similarly if                         A and B* is normal in B.
                                                                                                                                           is normal in
110                                              CHAPTER      II   THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                                                   8.   NORMAL AND SUBNORMAL SERIES                              111


        (i) A*(A fl B*) is a normal subgroup of A*(A fl B);                                                                                                      This refinement also has in    + l)(w + 1) terms. For each pair (ij) (0 < < n,        i

      (ii)  B*(A* fl B) is a normal subgroup o/B*(A fl B);                                                                                                          < j < m) there is by the Zassenhaus Lemma 8.9 (applied to Gi+U G», Hj+U and H )         }


      (iii) A*(A fl B)/A*(A fl B*) ^ B*(A (1 B)/B*(A* fl B).                                                                                                     an isomorphism:


   PROOF. Since B* is normal in B, A fl B* = (A fl B) fl B* is a normal sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                   G(iJ)
                                                                                                                                                                                           = Gi+l (Gj fl H,) ^ H]+l (Gj fl Hi) = H(i,j)
                                                                                                                                                                                 G(iJ + 1)           n //;+1 ) ~ Hi+1 (Gi+i fl // ) //(/ + l,y)"
group of A D B (Theorem 1.5.3 (i)); similarly A* fl B is normal in A fl B. Con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7




sequently D = (A* D B)(A fl 5*) is a normal subgroup of A fl B (Theorem                                                                                          This provides the desired one-to-one correspondence of the factors and shows that
1.5.3   and Exercise 1.5.13). Theorem 1.5.3 (iii) also implies that A*(A fl B)
         iii)                                                                                                                                                    the refinements are equivalent.
and B*(A fl B) are subgroups of A and B respectively. We shall define an
epimorphism f A*(A fl B) —> (A fl B)/D with kernel
                                            :                 fl B*). This will

imply that A*(A fl £*) is normal in A*(A fl 2?) (Theorem 1.5.5) and that
                                                                                                                                                                 Theorem 8.11. (Jordan-Holder) Any two composition series of a group G are
A*(A fl B)/A*(A (1 £*)^(/* fl B)/D (Corollary 1.5.7).
                                                                                                                                                                 equivalent. Therefore every group having a composition series determines a unique list
                                                                                                                                                                 of simple groups.
      Define / A\A fl B) —> (A fl B)/D as follows. If a e A*, c e A fl B, let
                                    :



/(ac) = Dc. Then /is well defined since ac = aiCi (a,ai e A*; c,a e A fl B) implies
       = ai~ a e(A     B) C\ A* = A* fl B < D, whence Z)ci = Dc. /is clearly sub-
                        l
                                                                                                                                                                        REMARK. The theorem does not state the existence of a composition series for a
                                                                                                                                                                 given group.
jective. / is an epimorphism since f[(aiC\)(a 2 c )] = f(aia c\c ) = Dcic = DciDc                    2        z   2                              2           2

 = f(aici)f(a c ), where zA*,CjtA fl £, and
                                2       2               a,- = flsCi since /** is normal in ,4.      <?itf 2


Finally ac s Ker / if and only if c e £>, that is, if and only if c = a c u with a e A* fl B                          x                          x
                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF OF 8.11. Since composition series are subnormal series, any two com-
                                                                                                                                                                 position series have equivalent refinements by the Theorem 8.10. But every refine-
and ci s A fl £*. Hence      e Ker / if and only if ac = (tftfi)ci £/**(/* fl £*). There-
                                                                                                                                                                 ment of a composition series S is equivalent to S by Lemma 8.8. It follows that any
fore,    Ker/= A*(A fl £*),
                                                                                                                                                                 two composition series are equivalent.
      A symmetric argument shows that B*(A* fl B) is normal                                                               in       B*(A fl B) and
B*(/4     fl          B)/B*(A* H B)9^(A fl B)/D, whence (iii) follows immediately.
                                                                                                                                                                    The Jordan-Holder Theorem indicates that some knowledge of simple groups
                                                                                                                                                                 might be useful. A major achievement in recent years has been the complete classifi-
                                                                                                                                                                 cation of all finite simple groups. This remarkable result is based on the work of a
Theorem 8.10. (Schreier) Any two subnormal [resp. normal] series ofa group G have                                                                                large number of group theorists. For an introduction to the problem and an outline
subnormal [resp. normal] refinements that are equivalent.
                                                                                                                                                                 of the method of proof, see Finite Simple Groups by Daniel Gorenstein (Plenum
                                                                                                                                                                 Publishing Corp., 1982). Nonabelian simple groups of small order are quite rare. It
      PROOF. Let G = G > d >          > G n and G = H > H >              •   •   •
                                                                                                                  x
                                                                                                                               •   •       •
                                                                                                                                               > Hm be sub-      can be proved that there are (up to isomorphism) only two nonabelian simple
normal [resp. normal] series. Let G n+ = (e) = Hm+l and for each                     i
                                                                                                                                               < < n con-
                                                                                                                                                     /           groups of order less than 200, namely A 5 and a subgroup of S7 of order 168 (see
sider the groups                                                                                                                                                 Exercises 13-20).

d=G               i+l (Gi fl                    Ho) >Gi+l (Gi (1 //!)>•••> Gi+l (Gi fl H,) > Gi+l (Gi fl H]+l )
                                            >      > Gi+l (Gi fl Hm ) > Gi+l (Gi fl Hm+l ) = Gi+l                                      .




For each      < j < m, the Zassenhaus Lemma (applied to Gi+ i,GiMi+u and //,)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           EXERCISES
shows that Gi+ i(Gi fl i/;+ i) is normal in Gi+ i(Gi fl //,). [If the original series were
both normal, then each Gi+ i(Gi fl //,) is normal in G by Theorem 1.5.3 (iii) and                                                                                 1 .   (a)    Find a normal series of D 4 consisting of 4 subgroups.
Exercises 1.5.2 and 1.5.13.] Inserting these groups between each           and Gi+U and                                       d                                         (b)    Find all composition series of the group D 4      .




denoting  Gi+ i(Gi fl Hj) by G(iJ) thus gives a subnormal [resp. normal] refinement                                                                                     (c) Do part (b) for the group A     4.


of the series Go > Gi >      > Gn                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                        (d) Do part (b) for the group S X Z 3     2.

                                                                                                                                                                        (e)    Find all composition factors of S 4 and D 6   .

          G = G(0,0) > G(0,1) >                                                              > G(0,w) > G(1,0) > G(l,l) >
 G(l,2) >   > G(l,m) > G(2,0) >
                       •    •   •                                                •   •   •
                                                                                             > G(n - l,w) > G(nfi) >      > G(/i,m),                              2.    If    G = Go > (/!>•••> G n is a subnormal series of a finite group G, then
where G(/,0) = Gi. Note that this refinement has (n + l)(m + 1) (not necessarily                                                                                        \G\    = (nift/G + i|)|Gn     |.


distinct) terms. A symmetric argument shows that there is a refinement of G = >                                                                          H
H, >      •
                            H
           > m (where HQ J) = //y+ i(G D #,) and #(0J) = ):
              •   •                                                                      -
                                                                                         t                        ^       7                                       3.    If AT is a simple normal subgroup of a group             G and G/N has a composition
                                                                                                                                                                        series, then   G has a composition series.
      G = H(0fl) > H(lfl) >                                        > H(nfl) > H(0,1) > #(1,1) > H(2,\) >                                                 >
          H(n,\) > //(0,2) >                                       > H(n,m - 1) > H(0,m) >     > H(n,m).                                                          4.    A composition series of a group is a subnormal series of maximal (finite) length.
112                         CHAPTER           II       THE STRUCTURE OF GROUPS                                                                        8.   NORMAL AND SUBNORMAL SERIES                           U3

 5.   An abelian group has a composition series if and only if it is finite.                                                   19.   The group G contains a subgroup P of order 7 such that the smallest normal sub-
                                                                                                                                     group of G containing P is G itself.
 6. If     H < G, where G has a composition series, then G has a composition series one
      of whose terms is H.                                                                                                     20. If (\) 9*   N < G, then  N= G; hence G is simple. [Use Exercise 1.5.19 and
                                                                                                                                     Exercise 18 to show P < N; apply Exercise 19.]
 7.   A solvable group with a composition series is finite.
 8.   If //and        K are solvable subgroups of G with H < G, then //# is a solvable sub-
      group of G.

 9.   Any group of order p 2q (p,q primes) is solvable.
10.   A group G is nilpotent if and only if there is a normal series G = G > Gi >
      > G n = (e) such that Gi/Gi+ < C{G/Gi+l ) for every
                                                        i                                         /.




11. (a)     Show that the analogue of Theorem 7.11                                    is        false for nilpotent   groups
      [Consider 5 3].
      (b) If     H < C(G) and G/H                  is       nilpotent, then       G is nilpptent.
12.   Prove the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, Introduction, Theorem 6.7, by
      applying the Jordan-Holder Theorem to the group                                       Zn    .




13.   Any simple group G of order 60 is isomorphic to A                                    b.   [Hint: use Corollary 4.9; if
      H < G, then [G H] > 5 (since:                               15,1   < 60 for n < 4); if [G H] = 5 then :



      G = A by Theorem 1.6.8. The assumption that there is no subgroup of index 5
                 b

      leads to a contradiction.]

14.   There are no nonabelian simple groups of order < 60.

15.   Let G be the subgroup of S 7 generated by (1234567) and (26)(34). Show that
      \G\    = 168.
      Exercises 16-20 outline a proof of the fact that the group                                       G of Exercise 15 is
simple.     We consider G as acting on the set 5 =                          {    1,2,3,4,5,6,7} as in the first example
after Definition 4.1         and make use of Exercise 4.6.

16.   The group G is transitive (see Exercise 4.6).

17.   For each x eS, G x is a maximal (proper) subgroup of G. The proof of this fact
      proceeds in several steps:
           (a)   A block of G is a subset r of S such that for each g e G either gT D T =
      or gT = T, where gT =               {
                                           gx x e T) Show that if T is a block, then |7*| divides 7.
                                                   \
                                                                  .



      [/ft/if: let     H = {g £             - T) and show that for x e T, Gx < and [//: GJ                  H
      = \T\. Hence           |r|      divides [G GJ = [G H][H G x ]. But [G GJ = 7 by
                                                              :              :          :                       :



      Exercise 4.6(a) and Theorem 4.3.]
           (b) If    Gx is not maximal, then there is a block T of G such that |r|^7, con-
      tradicting part (a). [Hint: li G £    < H < G, show that // is not transitive on S
      (since 1       < [H:GX < \S\, which contradicts Exercise 4.6.(d)). Let T = j/zx|/zs//j.
                              ]


      Since //is not transitive, |7| < |5|    = 7 and since // ^ GX9 \T\ > 1. Show that r
      is   a block.]

18. If (1)           N < G, then 7 divides                            [Hint: Exercise 4.6 (c) => Gx          < NGX for all
      x £ S => NGX = G for all x e S by Exercise 1 7 => N is transitive on 5 => 7 divides
      |W| by Exercise 4.6 (d).]
                                                         1                                                                                                          ;




                                                                                                                             1.   RINGS AND HOMOMORPHISMS                             115



                                                                                           1.     RINGS AND HOMOMORPHISMS
                                                                                               The basic concepts in the theory of rings are defined and numerous examples
                                                                                           given. Several frequently used calculational facts are presented. The only difficulty
                                                                                           with this material is the large quantity of terminology that must be absorbed in a
                                                                                           short period of time.
                                CHAPTER            1 1


                                                                                           Definition 1.1. A ring is a nonempty set                  R
                                                                                                                                             together with two binary operations

                                    RINGS                                                  (usually denoted as addition (-f ) and multiplication) such that:

                                                                                                  (i)    (R,-f ) is an abelian group;
                                                                                                  (ii)   (ab)c = a(bc) for all a,b,c £     R (associative multiplication);
                                                                                                (iii)    a(b    + c) = ab + ac and (a + b)c = ac + be (left and right distributive
                                                                                          laws).

                                                                                          If in addition:

                                                                                                (iv)     ab = ba for all a,b e R,

                                                                                          then    R is said to be a commutative ring. IfR contains an element R such that1


Another fundamental concept in the study of algebra is that of a ring. The problem
                                                                                                  (v)    l   R a = al R = a for all a e R,
of classifying all rings (in a given class) up to isomorphism is far more complicated     then    R is said to be a ring with identity.
than the corresponding problem for groups. It will be partially dealt with in Chapter
IX. The present chapter is concerned, for the most part, with presenting those facts
in the theory of rings that are most frequently used in several areas of algebra. The
                                                                                             REMARK. The symbol 1 R is also used to denote the identity map R                  — R. In
                                                                                          context this usage will not be ambiguous.
first   two sections deal with rings, homomorphisms and ideals. Much (but not all) of
this material is simply a straightforward generalization to rings of concepts which
                                                                                                The additive identity element of a ring is called the zero element and denoted 0.
have proven useful in group theory. Sections 3 and 4 are concerned with commuta-
                                                                                          If R is a ring, as R and «sZ, then na has its usual meaning for additive groups
tive rings that resemble the ring of integers in various ways. Divisibility, factoriza-
                                                                                          (Definition 1.1.8); for example, na = a + a      h a (n summands) when n > 0.
                                                                                                                                                     -\
tion, Euclidean rings, principal ideal domains, and unique factorization are studied
                                                                                          Before giving examples of rings we record
in Section 3. In Section 4 the familiar construction of the field of rational numbers
from the ring of integers is generalized and rings of quotients of an arbitrary com-
mutative ring are considered in some detail. In the last two sections the ring of poly-
nomials in n indeterminates over a ring R is studied. In particular, the concepts of      Theorem 1.2. Let R be a ring. Then
Section 3 are studied in the context of polynomial rings (Section 6).
                                                                                                  (i) 0a = aO =  for alia eR;
    The approximate interdependence of the sections of this chapter is as follows:
                                                                                                (ii)  (-a)b = a(-b) = — (ab) for all a,b e R;
                                                                                                (iii) (-a)(-b) = ab for all a,b e R;

                                                                                                (iv)     (na)b = a(nb) = n(ab) for all n e Z and all a,b e R

                                                                                                                     / n   \ /m     \        n   m
                                                                                                 M                  (^Zaij^Zbjj = ZZaib,                  for all   a^eR.

                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF,                 0a = (0 + 0)a = 0a + 0a, whence 0a = 0.
                                                                                                                                     (i)

                                                                                          (")   ab      + (-a)b = (a + (-a))b = Ob = 0, whence (~a)b = -(ab) by Theorem
                                                                                          I.1.2(iii). (ii)      implies (iii). (v) is proved by induction and includes (iv) as a special
                                                                                          case.



                                                                                                The next two definitions introduce some more terminology; after which some
Section 6 requires only certain parts of Sections 4 and 5.                                examples will be given.

                                          114
116                                          CHAPTER III                 RINGS                                                                                                         1.      RINGS AND HOMOMORPHISMS"                                                                                                                   yjj


Definition 1.3. A nonzero element a in a ring R is said to be a left [resp. right] zero                                  adopt a new notation for the elements of R(G). An element x = [r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gtG of R(G) has
                                   R such that ab = [resp. ba = 0]. A zero divisor
divisor // there exists a nonzero b £                                                                                    only finitely many nonzero coordinates, say r
                                                                                                                                                                                          g                                                                                                                        }


                                                                                                                                                                              r     s G).                                                             gi)     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,      gn (gi                       Denote x by the
is an element ofK which is both a left and a right zero divisor.                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                         formal sum rgigl                    +r g        g2    2 -\                     f-   r 0n g n or     X)                                   We also allow the possibility that
                                  R has no zero divisors if and only if the right and
       It is easy to verify that a ring
                                                                                                                         some of the rgi are zero or that some g are repeated, so that an element of R(G)
left cancellation laws hold in R; that is, for all a b,c e R with a 5* 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t

                                                                                                                         may be written in
                                                                                                                                                                                                 g + 0g2 = r g or
                                                                              9
                                                                                                                                                   formally different ways (for example, r
                                                                                                                         r \8\ + s \g\ = (fi + s ) gi). In this notation, addition in the group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x       x                      x   x


                              ab — ac         ox        ba — ca               =>     b = c.                                                                          x                          R(G) is given by:
                                                                                                                                                                                   n                           n                                 n

                                                                                                                                                                               1=1                           i=i                             i=i
Definition 1.4.           An element a in a ring R with identity is said to be left [resp. right] in-
                                                                                                                        (by inserting zero coefficients if necessary we can always assume
vertible if there exists c eR [resp. b e R] such that ca = 1r [resp. ab = 1r]. The ele-                                                                                                                                                                                that two formal
                                                                                                                        sums involve exactly the same indices gi,
ment c [resp. b] is called a left [resp. right] inverse of a. An element a e R that is both                                                                                                                                  .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   gn ). Define multiplication in R(G) by
left and right invert ible is said to be invertible or to be a unit.                                                                                                         (n                     \ / m                \                   n            m

       REMARKS, (i) The left and right inverses of a unit a in a ring R with identity
necessarily coincide (since ab —              l R   = ca implies b = \ R b = (ca)b = c(ab) = c\r = c).                  this makes sense since there is a product defined in both R (r^Sj)
                                                                                                                                                                                           and Gfe/z,) and thus
       The set of units in a ring              with identity forms a group under multiplication.                        the expression on the right is a formal sum as desired. With these operations
(ii)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R(G) is
                                                                                                                        a ring, called the group ring of G over R. R(G) is commutative if and only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             if both      R
                                                                                                                        and G are commutative. If R has an identity 1 R and e is the identity element of G,                                           ,


                                                                                                                        then \ R e is the identity element of R(G).
Definition 1.5.           A commutative ring R with identity l u                           aw*/ /10 zero divisors is
called an integral domain. A ring               D with identity Id                   in   which every nonzero ele-
ment is a unit is called a division ring. A field is a commutative division ring.                                          EXAMPLE. Let R be the field of real numbers and S the set of symbols l ij,k.                                                                                                                           9

                                                                                                                       Let K be the additive abelian group R
                                                                                                                       formal sums (a ,a u a2 a 3 ) = a l
                                                                                                                                                                       R     R                                     © © ©
                                                                                                                                                                                     R and write the elements of Kas
   REMARKS, (i) Every integral domain and every division ring has at least two                                                                                  ad     a 2j
                                                                                                                                                                         9    a z k. Then a \     ad    +a2 j      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                               a zk =                +                                                     +                   +             +
elements (namely and R (ii) A ring R with identity is a division ring if and only if
                                 \   ).
                                                                                                                       M+      bd     62 y+             +
                                                                                                                                             b 3 k if and only if a { = b{ for every /. We adopt the conventions
                                                                                                                       that tf l £ AT is identified with a s R and that terms with zero
the nonzero elements of R form a group under multiplication (see Remark (ii) after                                                                                                               coefficients may be

Definition 1.4). (iii) Every field F is an integral domain since ab = and a ^                                          omitted (for example, 4           2j = 4- 1     0/    2j            +
                                                                                                                                                                                    OA: and / =       1/           +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OA:).          +                        +                                        +                       + 0/ +
                                                                                                                       Then addition in K is given by
imply that b = \ F b = (ar d)b = ar (ab) = a'
                                     l              l                    l
                                                                              = 0.
                                                                                                                                                         (flo        +        flii         + aij + fla*) + (b + 61/ +                                                      Z> 2   y   + b k)z

    EXAMPLES. The ring Z of integers is an integral domain. The set E of even                                                                          = (*o + £0) + (fli + ft)/ + (a + fe)y + (a + ft)*.                            2                                            3
integers is a commutative ring without identity. Each of Q (rationals), R (real
                                                                                                                       Define multiplication in # by
numbers), and C (complex numbers) is a field under the usual operations of addition
and multiplication. The n X n matrices over Q (or R or C) form a noncommutative                                                                   to + ad + tf 2y + A 3 Ac)(ft + bd + fty + bjc)
ring with identity. The units in this ring are precisely the nonsingular matrices.                                                            = toft - flift - a b - azb ) + (a ft + tfift + a ft - a b )i
                                                                                                                                                                                               2    2              3                                                                   2               z       2


                                                                                                                                                  + (a b + a b + flA -
                                                                                                                                                                 2                     2                           flift)y           +           (tfoft           +        fl 3 ft    +    tfift       - a ^i)A:.      2
       EXAMPLE. For each positive integer                      //   the setZ,, of integers modulo n is a ring.
                                                                                                                       This product formula is obtained by multiplying the formal
See the example after Theorem 1.1.5 for details. If // is not prime, say n = kr with                                                                                                                                                                                                  sums term by term sub-
k > 1, r > 1, then A: 9* 0, r ^ and kr = kr = n =          in Z„, whence A and r are
                                                                                                                       ject to the following relations: (i) associativity; (ii)                         = ir\ r] = jr rk = kr (for all                        ri

zero divisors. If p is prime, thenZ^ is a field by Exercise 1.1.7.
                                                                                                                       rsR); (iii)       = k2 P=f                             = ijk = -1; ij = ~ji = k'Jk = -kj = /; ki = -ik=j.
                                                                                                                       Under this product AT is a noncommutative division ring in which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the multiplicative

       EXAMPLE. Let A be an abelian group and let End A                                   be the set   of endomor-
                                                                                                                       inverse           of       a    + + a j + ajc   (a /d) - ai /d)i - (a /d)j - (a /d)k
                                                                                                                                                                                   2                          is
                                                                                                                                                                                                             where                                (                                   2                         z            9
                                                                                                                       d - tfo 2 + a 2                + a + ai K called the division ring of real quaternions. The
                                                                                                                                                             2                 l

            A — A. Define addition in End A by (/+ g)(a) = f(a) + g(a). Verify
                                                                                                                                              x          2                         .           is
phisms /      :       >
                                                                                                                       quaternions may also be interpreted as a certain subring of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the ring of all 2 X 2
that   /+ g  End A. Since A is abelian, this makes End A an abelian group. Let multi-
                  z
                                                                                                                       matrices over the field C of complex numbers (Exercise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8).
plication in End A be given by composition of functions. Then End A is a (possibly
                                                                                                                           Definition 1.1 shows that under multiplication the elements
                                                                                                                                                                                        of a ring R form a
noncommutative) ring with identity l.i                     :   A—   ->   A.
                                                                                                                       semigroup (a monoid if R has an identity). Consequently Definition
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.1.8 is appli-
                                                                                                                       cable and exponentiation is defined in R. We have for each
                                                                                                                                                                                        a e R and n s N*,
       EXAMPLE. Let G be a (multiplicative) group and R a ring. Let R(G) be the                                        an = a    -a (n factors) and a = l R if R has an identity. By Theorem 1.1.9
                                                                                                                                     •



additive abelian group                   R (° ne co Py of R f° r each g 1 C). It will be convenient to
                                                                                                                                                                               a m a n = a m+n                         an(J              ( fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m)n          =       fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .           }




118                                                                                  CHAPTER III                                 RINGS                                                                                                               1.        RINGS AND HOMOMORPH1SMS                                    119


Subtraction in a ring R is defined in the usual way: a — b = a -\- (—b). Clearly                                                                                                                         morphism of rings which is an injective [resp. surjective, bijective] map. A mono-
a(b — c) = ab — ac and (a  — b)c = ac — be for all a,b,c e R.                                                                                                                                            morphism of rings R — S is sometimes called an embedding of R in S. An isomor-
       The next theorem is frequently useful in computations. Recall that if k and n are                                                                                                                 phism R — > R is called an automorphism of R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             The kernel of a homomorphism of rings / R -> S is its kernel as a map of addi-
integers               with                  < k < n,                           then           the             binomial             coefficient
                                                                                                                                                          (j^j
                                                                                                                                                                          is       the       number
                                                                                                                                                                                                         tive groups; that is, Ker /= {r e R f(r) = 0} Similarly the image of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /, denoted    .



                                                                                                                                                                                                         Im /, is s e S s = f(r) for some r e R If R and S both have identities \ R and l s we
n\/(n - k)\k\, where 0!                                                    = 1 and n\ = n(n - l)(n - 2)- -21 for n > 1.                          •                                                 is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (            |                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,

                                                                                                                                                                                             (£j         do not require that a homomorphism of rings map \ R to \ s (see Exercises 15, 16).
actually an integer (Exercise 10).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EXAMPLES. The canonical rnap Z -*Zm given by k h> k is an epimorphism of
                                                                                                                                                                                                        rings.     The map Z3 -» Z6 given by k H> 4k is a well-defined monomorphism of
Theorem 1.6. (Binomial Theorem). Let R be a ring with identity, n a positive integer,                                                                                                                   rings.

and a,b,ai,a2,                .      .   .   ,   a 8 e R.

                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. Let G and be multiplicative groups and / G — a homomor-                              :   >   H
       (i)         //ab = ba, then (a + b) n =                                                         £ (k)
                                                                                                           =o
                                                                                                                             akt,n k;                                                                    phism of groups. Let # be a ring and define a map on the group rings/ R(G)-+R(H)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




       (ii)        //ajaj         = SijSiifor all                           i   and), then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /( ]C W.- ) = ]C >*//(&).
                                         (ai      +a +             2        •    •
                                                                                     + a n = ]T
                                                                                              s)
                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                             ila i2
                                                                                                                                         „ ai 2       '
                                                                                                                                                          •




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Then/ is a homomorphism of rings.
where the sum is over all s-tuples (ii,i 2                                                         ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                       is)   such that h       +h+            •   *   •
                                                                                                                                                                          + h = n.

       SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Use induction on n and the fact that (j^j +                                                                                                                                 Definition 1.8. Let R be a ring. If there is a least positive integer n such that na =
                                                                                                                                                                                             (^j)       for all a s R, then R zj said to have characteristic n. // no such n exists R is said to
= (?"'"! ) for k < n (Exercise 10(c)); the distributive law and the commutativity of                                                                                                                    have characteristic zero. (Notation: char R                                       = n).

a and b are essential, (ii) Use induction on s. The case s = 2 is just part (i) since

(tfi   +a n=   2)                            (   i   W^r* =                                   52               tt^ aiW. If the theorem is true for s, note                                              Theorem 1.9. Let R be a ring with identity R and characteristic n > 0.            1



that                                                                                                                                                                                                              (i)   If<p     :   Z -> R /j r/ze wtf/; g/z*77 6y m H ml R z/z^az <p is a homomorphism of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                        rings with kernel (n)                 = kn k £ Z}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j         |




(fli   +   •   •   •
                       + a + a s+l n = (ta +••+*.) + ^ s+ n = Z (j)( +
                              s                            )                                                                        i)
                                                                                                                                                                  fl i         •   •   *
                                                                                                                                                                                           + a ka T*
                                                                                                                                                                                              s)                 (ii)   n is the least positive integer such that nl R = 0.
                                                                                                                                                 q                                                              (iii)   IfR has no zero divisors (in particular ifR is an integral domain), then n is
                         n   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        prime.
=        22             777 (fli +                     •       •       •
                                                                           +a   s)
                                                                                     k
                                                                                         a s+l by part (i). Apply the induction hypothesis and
                                                                                          ]



   k+j = n              k\j\
compute.                                                                                                                                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF, (ii) If k is the least positive integer such that k\ R = 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        then for all a e R: ka = k(\ R a) = (kl )a =    a =    by Theorem 1.2. (iii) If n = kr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        with 1 < k < ,z, 1 < r < n, then        = n\ R = (kr)\ R \ R = (k\ R )(rl R ) implies that
                                                                                                                                                                                                        k\, {    -          or r\ 1{     = 0, which contradicts (ii).
Definition 1.7. Let R and S be rings. A function f                                                                                       :   R —+ S is a homomorphism of
rings provided that for all a,b e R:

                                                 f(a   + b) = f(a) + f(b)                                               and        f(ab)     = f(a)f(b).                                                Theorem 1.10. Every ring R may be embedded in a ring S with identity. The ring S
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (which is not unique) may be chosen to be either
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         of characteristic zero or of the same
       REMARK. It is easy to see that the class of all rings together with all ring homo-                                                                                                               characteristic as R.
morphisms forms a (concrete) category.
       When the context is clear then we shall frequently write "homomorphism" in
place of "homomorphism of rings." A homomorphism of rings is, in particular, a
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF. Let 5, be the additive abelian group R © Z and define
                                                                                                                                                                                                        multiplication in S by
homomorphism of the underlying additive groups. Consequently the same termi-
nology is used a monomorphism [resp. epimorphism, isomorphism] of rings is a homo-
                                 :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (ri,ki)(r-iM)        = (fir + k n + k^k^), (n £ R; k z Z).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2           2                           x
                                        Z                                                                           R



120                                                   CHAPTER III       RINGS                                                                                                     1.       RINGS AND HOMOMORPHISMS                                                     121



Verify that S is a ring with identity (0,1) and characteristic zero and that the map                                           9.       (a) The subset G = 1,- l,/,-/,./,-/',A,-A of the division ring
                                                                                                                                                                                       (                               )                                 K of real
       given by r (-> (r,0) is a ring monomorphism (embedding). If char R = n > 0,                                                      quaternions forms a group under multiplication.
use a similar proof with S =                         R@Z
                                        n and multiplication defined by
                                                                                                                                        (b)    G is isomorphic to the quaternion group (Exercises 1.4.14 and 1.2.3).
                                                                                                                                        (c)    What is the difference between the ring K and the group ring R(G) (R the
                                        (r u ki)(r 2 ,k2)   = (nr +
                                                                  2   /c 2   n + k^kih),                                                field of real numbers)?

where            e         and £»• e      n     is   the image of fceZ under the canonical map.                 Then
char S = n.
                                                                                                                              10.       Let k,n be integers such that                                   <    A"   < w and               the binomial coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (j^J
                                                                                                                                        n\/(n - k)\kU                      where 0! = 1               and    for    n > 0, n\         = n(n - l)(n - 2)-         •   -2-1.

                                                            EXERCISES                                                                        « G) - U)
 1.   (a)   Let G be an (additive) abelian group. Define an operation of multiplication
      in    G by ab =                 (for all         e G).   Then G is a ring.
      (b)    Let S be the set of all subsets of some fixed set U. For A,B eS, define
      A +     B = (A - B) U (B - A) and AB = A f) B. Then 5 is a ring. Is 5 com-                                                                                 +                                          for
                                                                                                                                             *>G")                        G:.)-(;t!)
      mutative? Does it have an identity?
                                                                                                                                             (d)                 is   an integer.
 2.   Let    j   Ri    |
                           /   e /}be a family of rings with identity. Make the direct sum of abelian
      groups          ^        &i mto  a ring by denning multiplication coordinate wise. Does     ^<           ^                             (e)    if   p is prime and 1                      < A < p n — 1, then (^^j is divisible by p.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




      have an identity?

 3.   A ring R such that a = a for all a e R is called a Boolean ring. Prove that every
                                            2
                                                                                                                                        IHinrs: (b) observe that
                                                                                                                                                                                           (^) - («)^;                      (d) note that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (j)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -(*)-,
      Boolean ring R is commutative and a -{- a =                               for all a e     [For an example of a                    and use induction on n in part (c).]
      Boolean ring, see Exercise 1(b).]
                                                                                                                          1    1   .
                                                                                                                                        (The Freshman's Dream ). Let R be a commutative ring with identity of prime
                                                                                                                                                                                           1




 4.   Let R be a ring and S a nonempty set. Then the group M(S,R) (Exercise 1.1 .2) is a                                                characteristic/?. If a,b e R, then (a db by"                               =        ±   />>'"   for all integers n   >        [see
      ring with multiplication defined as follows: the product of f,ge M(S,R) is the                                                   Theorem 1.6 and Exercise 10; note that b = — Z> if /; = 2].
      function S — * R given by s |-» f(s)g(s).
                                                                                                                          1   2.       An element of a ring is nilpotent if u" =                                   for some //. Prove that in a commuta-
 5.   If    ^ is the abelian group                    Z© Z, then End ^              is   a noncommutative ring (see                    tive ring a           + b is nilpotent if a and b are. Show that this result may be false if R
      page 116).                                                                                                                        is   not commutative.

 6.   A finite ring with more than one element and no zero divisors is                               a division ring.     13.           In a ring R the following conditions are equivalent.
      (Special case: a finite integral domain is a field.)                                                                                   (a)    R has no nonzero nilpotent elements (see Exercise 12).
                                                                                                                                             (b) If a e  R and a 2 = 0, then a = 0.
 7.   Let R be a ring with more than one element such that for each nonzero a e R
      there is a unique b s R such that aba = a. Prove:                                                                   14.           Let R be a commutative ring with identity and prime characteristic p. The map
           (a) R has no zero divisors.                                                                                                  R          R given by r f-> r» is a homomorphism of rings called the Frobenius homo-
           (b) bab = b.                                                                                                                 morphism [see Exercise 11].
           (c) R has an identity.

           (d) R is a division ring.
                                                                                                                          15. (a)             Give an example of a nonzero homomorphism /                                                :   R — 5 of rings with
                                                                                                                                       identity such that/(l«)                             ^ Is.
 8.   Let R be the set of all 2 X 2 matrices over the complex field C of the form                                                      (b)    H f :R—+ S                    is    an epimorphism of rings with                        identity, then /(I/O           = 15   .




                                                                                                                                       (c)    If/ R— S                           a homomorphism of rings with identity and u is a unit in R

                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                         :            >    is

                                                                      ">                                                               such that/(i/)isa unit in 5, then f{\ R ) = l^and/^ ) - /(n)" 1 [Note: there are           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .



                                                                                                                                       easy examples which show that f{u) need not be a unit in 5 even though u is a
      where z,w are the complex conjugates of                                   z    and w     respectively (that   is,                unit in R.]

      c = a     b^[^\ <=> c = a — byj^l). Then # is a division ring that is isomorphic
                     -f-                                                                                                                                     —
                                                                                                                                       Let / R >S be a homomorphism of rings such that f(r)
                                                                                                                          16.                                                                          for some non-                           ^
      to the division ring K of real quaternions. [Hint: Define an isomorphism K
                                                                                                                                                   :




                                                                                                                                       zero r eR.U R has an identity and S has no zero divisors, then 5 is a ring with
      by letting the images of \,ij,k eKbe respectively the matrices                                                                   identity f(\ I{ ).


                                                                                                                                       terminology due to V. O. McBrien.
                                                                                                          ;                    1                                     :




122                                                   CHAPTER III                        RINGS                                                                                                2.            IDEALS                                                   123


17.       (a) If R is a ring, then so is R \ where R p is defined as follows. The underlying
                                                           l
                                                                                                                          but not a right ideal. If J k consist of those matrices with nonzero entries only in row
          set of R p is precisely R and addition in R coincides with addition in R. Multi-
                   "
                                                                                         ;'
                                                                                                                          A    ,   then Jk is a right ideal but not a left ideal.
          plication in R" denoted °, is defined by a ° b = ba* where ba is the product in R.
                               })
                                    ,



          R is called the opposite ring of R.
            n}>
                                                                                                                                    EXAMPLE. Two ideals of a ring R are R itself and the trivial ideal (denoted 0),
          (b) R has an identity if and only if R    does.                  '
                                                                                                                          which consists only of the zero element.
          (c) R is a division ring if and only if R   is.                      ">>



          (d) (/*"")"" = R.                                                                                                        REMARKS. A [left] ideal I of R such that / ^      and / ^ R is called a proper [left]
          (e) If S is a ring, then R ^ S if and only if R " ^ S                                                           ideal. Observe that if                    R has an identity              1   R and / is a [left] ideal of R, then / =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                R if and
                                                                                                                          only if R £ /. Consequently, a nonzero [left] ideal / of R is proper if and only if / con-
1    8.   LetQ be the field of rational numbers and R any ring. If fg Q — R are homo-                         :   *
                                                                                                                                              1



                                                                                                                          tains no units of R\ (for if u £ R is a unit and u z /, then 1 R = u~ u z I). In particular, a                     l

          morphisms of rings such that f\ Z = g Z, then /= g. [Hint: show that for   \




                                                                                                                          division ring D has no proper left (or right) ideals since every nonzero element of D is
          n £ Z        ^ 0),                          = frtD, whence /(l, n) = g(\/n).]
                                                                                                                          a unit. For the converse, see Exercise 7. The ring of n X n matrices over a division
                                                                                                                          ring has proper left and right ideals (see above), but no proper (two-sided) ideals
                                                                                                                          (Exercise 9).
2.        IDEALS
          Just as normal subgroups played a crucial role in the theory of groups, so ideals
                                                                                                                          Theorem 2.2. A nonempty subset I of a ring R is a left [resp. right] ideal if and only if
play an analogous role in the study of rings. The basic properties of ideals are de-
                                                                                                                          for all a,b £ I and r £ R
veloped, including a characterization of principal ideals (Theorem 2.5) and the vari-
ous isomorphism theorems (2.9-2.    3 these correspond to the isomorphism theorems
                                                          1    ;                                                                    (i)       a,b £ I          =>            a    — bsl\ and
for groups).  Prime and maximal ideals are characterized in several ways. Direct                                                   (ii)       a £ I, r £   R         ==>            ra£l [resp. ar £ I].
products in the category of rings are discussed and the Chinese Remainder Theorem
is    proved.                                                                                                                      PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem 1.2.5.


Definition 2.1. Let R be a ring and S a nonempty subset ofR that is closed under the                                      Corollary 2.3. Let                    \   Ai   1

                                                                                                                                                                             i   £ 1{   be a family of [left] ideals in a ring R. Then f| Ai is
operations ofaddition and multiplication inK.IfS is itself a ring under these operations
then S is called a subring ofR. A subring I of a ring R is a left ideal provided                                          also a [left] ideal.


                                            r £   R    and         x a I                 =>      rx £ I
                                                                                                                                   PROOF. Exercise.
I is      a right ideal provided

                                            r s   R    and         x £ I                 =>      xr £ I                   Definition 2.4. Let X be a subset of a ring R. Let                    A      £ 1} be the family of all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [   {   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i



                                                                                                                          [left]         ideals in      R which contain X. Then f) Aj is called the [left] ideal generated by X.
I is an      ideal // it is both a left and right ideal.                                                                                                                                               iti

                                                                                                                          This ideal is denoted (X).

          Whenever a statement is made about left ideals it is to be understood that the
analogous statement holds for right ideals.                                                                                  The elements of X are called generators of the ideal (X). If     = \x u       xn                                    X   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   }   9


                                                                                                                          then the ideal (X) is denoted by (a,,.Vj, .v„) and said to be finitely generated. An
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .    .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,




    EXAMPLE. If R is any ring, then the center of R is the set C = \c £ R cr = rc                                     \
                                                                                                                          ideal ( v) generated by a single element is called a principal ideal.                                        A principal ideal ring
for all r e R] C is easily seen to be a subring of R, but may not be an ideal (Exer-
                       .
                                                                                                                          is   a ring in which every ideal is principal.                                         A principal ideal ring which is an integral
cise 6).
                                                                                                                          domain is called a principal ideal domain. 2


   EXAMPLE. If / R — S is a homomorphism of rings, then Ker /is an ideal in R
                                        :     >

                                                                                                                          Theorem 2.5. Let R be a ring a £ R and X C R.
(Theorem 2.8 below) and Im / is a subring of S. Im / need not be an ideal in S.
                                                                                                                                        (i)   The principal ideal (a) consists of all elements of the form ra + as + na +
          EXAMPLE. For each integer n the cyclic subgroup (n) = {kn\keZ} is an                                            m
ideal in Z.                                                                                                               ^ a      ri    Si   (r,s,ri,Si e R;   m e N*; and n e Z).
                                                                                                                          i—


          EXAMPLE. In the ring R of n X n matrices over a division ring Z), let h be the                                     2
                                                                                                                               The term "principal ideal ring" is sometimes used in the literature to denote what we
set of all matrices that have nonzero entries only in column k. Then lk is a left ideal,                                  have called a principal ideal domain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .




124                                                                                                                      CHAPTER III                                           RINGS                                                                                                                                                         2.   IDEALS                                      125


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 2.7. Let R be a ring and I an ideal ofR. Then the additive quotient group
         (ii)    IfR has an identity, then (a) =                                                                                                                           nasi             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                    r i5 Si e R; n e    N*           .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R/I is a ring with multiplication given by
                                                                                                                                                        .t = i                                                                       J



         (iii)       // a is in the center ofR, then (a) =                                                                                                                 {   ra       + na r £ R, n e Z}   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a   + I)(b + I) = ab +     I.

         (iv)        Ra = {ra                                      |
                                                                       r e         R}                   [resp.                   aR = jar                          |
                                                                                                                                                                           r e R}] is                        a left [resp. right] ideal in R
(which may not contain a). //R has an identity, then a e Ra and a e aR.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IfR is commutative or has an identity, then the same is true of R/I.
          IfR has an identity and a is in the center ofR, then Ra = (a) = aR.
          (v)
     (vi) IfR has an identity andX is in the center ofR, then the ideal (X) consists of                                                                                                                                                                                                        SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.7. Once we have shown that multiplication in
all finite sums nai H        r„a n (n e N*; n e R; a e X).                                     (-                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R/I is well defined, the proof that R/I is a ring is routine. (For example, if R has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           identity l R then 1 R + / is the identity in R/I.) Suppose a + I = a' + I and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,




         REMARK. The hypothesis of (iii) is always satisfied in a commutative ring.                                                                                                                                                                                                        b + / = b' + /. We must show that ab + I = a'b' + /. Since a' ea' + I = a + I,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a' = a + i    for some     £ /.  Similarly b' = b + j with j £ /. Consequently
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /'




         SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.5. (i) Show that the set                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a'b' = (a + i)(b + j) = ab + ib + aj + ij. Since / is an ideal,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a'b'   — ab = ib + aj +   ij e I.
                               / = jra                                     + as + na + ^ r                                                              * flrJ *       I
                                                                                                                                                                           r >s,ri9 Si e R;n e Z; n? e                                   N*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  j                                        Therefore a'b'   + / = ab + / by Corollary 1.4.3, whence multiplication in R/I                      is

is  an ideal containing a and contained in every ideal containing a. Then / = (a).                                                                                                                                                                                                         well defined.
(ii) follows from the facts that ra = ral#, as = \ R as, and    = n(l R a) = (n\ R )a,
with n\ R e R.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                As one might suspect from the analogy with groups, ideals and homomorphisms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of rings are closely related.
         Let /4!,^2,      nonempty subsets of a ring R. Denote by A + A 2 H
                                       .       .
                                                       .   ,
                                                               /i n be                   h /* n                                                                                                                              {



the set          {   fli       +a H
                                a, e A< for  = 1,2, ...,«). If /I and 5 are nonempty
                                                   2                               h an                      \
                                                                                                                         :
                                                                                                                                                    /'




                        denote the set of all finite sums {a^bi +          + ci n bn n e N*;
subsets of      let
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 2.8. Iff R — S is a homomorphism ofrings, then the kernel off is an ideal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :       >

          e Z?J. If /I consists of a single element a, we write aB for              Similarly
«i e /4;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in R. Conversely if I is an ideal in R, then the map t R — R/I given by r |—> r + I is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :         >

if B =   6} we write ,46 for
                           ,        Observe that if B [resp. /4] is closed under addition,
                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an epimorphism of rings with kernel I.
then        aB = {a£|£e/?}                                                                 [resp.                                    =                        #£/!}].                                   More generally let A A 2                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -       An
denote the set of all finite sums of elements of the form a\a 2                                                                                                                                                                  -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a n (aieAi for
  = 1,2, ...                                                                                                                                                                                            <        < n) are the same set A we                                                   The map ir is called the canonical epimorphism (or projection).
/                              ,
                                   n).                     In the special case when all A                                                                                           l       (1               /


denote A A           X     2   -   •       •
                                                   An = AA                                     •    •            A by A n                 .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROOF OF 2.8. Ker /is an additive subgroup of R. If x £ Ker /and r e R, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f(rx) = f(r) f(x) = f(r)0 = 0, whence rx e Ker /. Similarly, xr e Ker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / Therefore,
Theorem 2.6. Le/ A,Ai,A                                                                                 2,       .   .       .
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                     A„, B and C be [left] ideals in a ring R.                                                                                                             Ker /is an ideal. By Theorem 1.5.5 the map t is an epimorphism of groups with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kernel I. Since ir(ab) = ab            + I = (a + I)(b + /) = ic(a)ic(b) for all a,b e R,   ir is also
          (i)        Ai + A 2 +  + A and A A A are [left] ideals;      •   •   •
                                                                                                         n                            X       2 -
                                                                                                                                                    •     •
                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an epimorphism of rings.
         (ii)        (A + B) + C = A + (B + C);
         (iii)       (AB)C = ABC = A(BC);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In view of the preceding results it is not surprising that the various isomorphism
         (iv)      + A„) = BAi + BA +
                     B(Ai + A 2 +                                              •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                               2                •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BA„;      and (A, + A 2 +                             •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +    theorems for groups (Theorems 1.5.6— 1.5.12) carry over to rings with normal sub-
A )C = AiC + A C +
     n              + A C.                                     2
                                                                                       •       •   •
                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           groups and groups replaced by ideals and rings respectively. In each case the desired
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           isomorphism is known to exist for additive abelian groups. If the groups involved
         SKETCH OF PROOF. Use Theorem 2.2 for (i). (iii) is a bit complicated but                                                                                                                                                                                                          are, in fact, rings and the normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          subgroups ideals, then one need only verify that
straightforward argument using the definitions. Use induction to prove (iv) by first                                                                                                                                                                                                       the known isomorphism of groups is also a homomorphism and hence an isomor-
showing that A(B + C) = AB + AC and (A + B)C = AC + BC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    phism of rings. Caution: in the proofs of the isomorphism theorems for groups all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           groups and cosets are written multiplicatively, whereas the additive group of a ring
         Ideals play approximately the same role in the theory of rings as normal sub-                                                                                                                                                                                                     and the cosets of an ideal are written additively.
groups do in the theory of groups. For instance, let R be a ring and / an ideal of R.
Since the additive group of R is abelian, / is a normal subgroup. Consequently, by
Theorem 1.5.4 there is a well-defined quotient group R/I in which addition is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 2.9. Iff R —* S is a homomorphism of rings and I is an ideal of R which is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :

given by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           contained in the kernel off, then there is a unique homomorphism of rings f  R/I —> S   :


                                                                                               (a       + I) + (b + I) = (a + b) +                                                                               I.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           such that f(a     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I) f(a) for all a £ R. Im f = Im f and Ker f = (Ker f)/I. f is an iso-
R/I can in fact be made into a ring.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       morphism if and only iff is an epimorphism and I = Ker f.
126                                   CHAPTER ill    RINGS                                                                                                     2.    IDEALS                                                             127



      PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem 1.5.6.                                                         Theorem 2.15. // P is an ideal in a ring R such that P^R and for all a,b e R

                                                                                                                                           abeP            =»        aeP          or       b e P,                                       (1)

Corollary 2.10.        {First   Isomorphism Theorem) If f   :   R — S is a homomorphism of
                                                                   >                              then P is prime. Conversely ifPis prime and                                 R is commutative, then P satisfies con-
rings, then f induces an isomorphism of rings R/ Ker i=:Imi.                                      dition (1).



      PROOF. Exercise; see Corollary 1.5.7.                                                             REMARK. Commutativity is necessary for the converse (Exercise 9 (b)).

                                                                                                        PROOF OF 2.15. If A and B are ideals such that AB CZ P and A (Zl P, then
                                                                                                                             — P. For every b e B, ab e AB (Z P, whence aeP or
                                                                                                  there exists an element ae A
Corollary 2.11. If f R — > Sis a homomorphism of rings, I is an ideal in Rand J is an
                          :


                                                                                                  be P. Since a % P, we must have beP for all 6 e J5; that is, B (Z P. Therefore, P is
ideal in S such that f(I) (Z J, then f induces a homomorphism of rings f  R/I — > S/J,
                                                                                :

                                                                                                  prime. Conversely, if P is any ideal and ab e P, then the principal ideal {ab) is con-
given by a -f- I f—» f(a) -f- J. f /s a« isomorphism if and only if Im f + J = S and
                                                                                                  tained in P by Definition 2.4. If                        is      commutative, then Theorem 2.5 implies that
         I. In particular, iffis an epimorphism such that f(I) = J and Ker f CZ I, then
 _1
f (J)
                                                                                                  {a){b) <Z {ab),    whence {a){b) (Z P. If P is prime, then either {a) <Z P or (6) C P,
f is an isomorphism.
                                                                                                  whence a e P or b e P.

      PROOF. Exercise; see Corollary 1.5.8.                                                             EXAMPLES. The zero ideal in any integral domain is prime since ab = if and
                                                                                                  only if a =  or b = 0. If p is a prime integer, then the principal ideal (/?) in Z is
                                                                                                  prime since
Theorem 2.12. Let I and J be ideals in a ring R.
                                                                                                            abe{p)     =>   /?   I
                                                                                                                                     tf6     =>       /?   I
                                                                                                                                                               a     or       p\b          =>   a s (77)          or   6 e (77).
      (i)    {Second Isomorphism Theorem) There is an isomorphisms of rings 1/(1         J)   ^
(I   + J)/J;
      (ii)   {Third Isomorphism Theorem) if I CZ J, then J/I is an ideal in R/I and there is      Theorem 2.16. In a commutative ring R with identity 1r ^                                                    on ideal P /s prime
an isomorphism of rings (R/I)/(J/I)        = R/J.                                                 if and only if the quotient ring R/P is an integral domain.


      PROOF. Exercise; see Corollaries 1.5.9 and 1.5.10.                                                PROOF. R/P is a commutative ring with identity R + P and zero element                       1

                                                                                                    + P = P by Theorem 2.7. If Pis prime, then 1* + P ^ P since P ^ R. Further-

                                                                                                  more, R/P has no zero divisors since
Theorem 2.13. If I is an ideal in a ring R, then there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the set of all ideals ofR which contain I and the set of all ideals oj'R/I, given
                                                                                                           (a   + P)(£ + P) = P              =>       ab + P = P                   ==>       abeP            =>    aeP       or

by J |—» J/I. Hence every ideal in R/I /s of the form J/I, w/zere J /s tf/i /V/ea/ o/R w/z/'c/z                             beP            ==>    a   + P = P or                       b   + P = P.
contains I.
                                                                                                  Therefore, R/P is an integral domain. Conversely, if R/P is an integral domain, then
                                                                                                  lfi   + P 9^ + P, whence \r\P. Therefore, P 7* R. Since R/P has no zero divisors,
      PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem 1. 5. 11, Corollary 1. 5. 12 and Exercise 13.
                                                                                                         abeP         ab + P = P                 =>        {a       + P)(Z> + P) = P                          a   +P=P             or

      Next we shall characterize in several ways two kinds of ideals (prime and maxi-                                                b   +P=p                   =»        £   p    or        6eP.
mal), which are frequently of interest.
                                                                                                  Therefore, P is prime by Theorem 2.15.



Definition 2.14.        An ideal P in a ring R is said to be prime ifP ^ R and for any ideals     Definition 2.17.An ideal [resp. left ideal] M in a ring R   said to be maximal if                     is
A,B in R                                                                                          M ^ R and for every ideal [resp. left ideal] N such that MCNCR, either N = M
                                ABCP         ACP or B (Z               P.
                                                                                                  or    N = R.

      The definition of prime ideal excludes the ideal R for both historical and technical              EXAMPLE. The ideal (3) is maximal in Z; but the ideal (4) is not since (4) CZ
reasons. Here is a very useful characterization of prime ideals; other characteriza-
                                                                                                  (2) (Z Z.
tions are given in Exercise 14.
                                                                                                                                                                                        R


128                                                CHAPTER III                  RINGS                                                                                                                                     2.        IDEALS                                              129


      REMARK. If R is a ring and S is the set of all ideals I of R such that / ^ R, then                                                               (i)        7/M is maximal and R is commutative, then the quotient ring R/M is a field.
S is partially ordered by set-theoretic inclusion. Mis a maximal ideal (Definition 2.17)                                                              (ii)       If the quotient ring R/M is a division ring, then                                        M   is maximal.

if and only if     M
                   is a maximal element in the partially ordered set S in the sense of

Introduction, Section 7. More generally one sometimes speaks of an ideal / that is                                                                 REMARKS, (i) is false if R does not have an identity (Exercise 19). If is maxi-                                                M
maximal with respect to a given property, meaning that under the partial ordering of                                                            mal and R is not commutative, then R/M need not be a division ring (Exercise 9).
set theoretic inclusion, / is                   maximal in the set of all ideals of R which have the given
property. In this case / need not be maximal in the sense of Definition 2.17.                                                                     PROOF OF 2.20. (i) If M is maximal, then M is prime (Theorem 2.19), whence
                                                                                                                                                R/M an integral domain by Theorem 2.16. Thus we need only show that if
                                                                                                                                                             is

                                                                                                                                                 + M^M, then a + M has a multiplicative inverse in R/M. Now a + M ^ M
                                                                                                                                                fl


Theorem 2.18. In a nonzero ring R with identity maximal [left] ideals always exist.                                                             implies that a \ M, whence                                  M properly contained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is                                in the ideal   M+    (a). Since   M   is

In fact every [left] ideal in                   R (except R itself) is contained in a maximal [left] ideal.                                     maximal, we must have                                       M
                                                                                                                                                                            + (a) = R. Therefore, since R is commutative,
                                                                                                                                                \r = m + ra for some m e Mand r e R, by Theorem 2.5(v). Thus \ R — ra = m e M,
      PROOF. Since                    is   an ideal and       ^ R,        it suffices to        prove the second statement.                     whence
The proof is a straightforward application of Zorn's Lemma. If A is a [left] ideal in R                                                                                  + M = ra + M = (r + M)(a + M).
                                                                                                                                                                                        \   R
such that A ^ R, let S be the set of all [left] ideals B in R such that A <Z B ^ R. S is
nonempty since A s S. Partially order §> by set theoretic inclusion (that is,                                                                  Thus r 4- M      a multiplicative inverse of a + M in /?/M, whence /?/M
                                                                                                                                                                          is                                            a field.                                                  is

B < B 2 <=> Bi (Z B 2 ). In order to apply Zorn's Lemma we must show that every                                                                        If
                                                                                                                                                     (ii)           a division ring, then b + M^O + M, whence 1« M and
                                                                                                                                                                               is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ^
 l


chain £ =     {   Q:   |
                           i e   1}    of [left] ideals in CS has an upper bound in S. Let C ^= (J C                                 t .
                                                                                                                                               M 5* If Wis an ideal such that M (Z TV, let a N - M. Then a + Mhas a multi-
                                                                                                                                                         /?.                                                                             e
                                                                                                                             hi
                                                                                                                                               plicative inverse in R/M, say (a + M)(b + M) = R + M. Consequently, ab + M
We claim that C is a [left] ideal. If a,b e C, then for some ij el, ae C and b e Q.                             {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \


Since 6 is a chain, either d <Z Q or C, (Z C say the latter. Hence a,b e Q. Since d
                                                                                                                                               = Ir + M and ab — R = c M. But               N and M CI N imply that beiV. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                            1                   e              <z   s

                                                                                                                                               N = R. Therefore, M maximal.
                                                                          t ;



is a left ideal, a — b e C and r« e C,- for all r e R (if C is an ideal ar e d as well).
                                                                                                                                                                                            is
                                            {


Therefore, a,b e C imply a — b and      are in d (Z C. Consequently, C is a [left] ideal
by Theorem 2.2. Since A (Z d for every          A (Z (J C = C. Since each d is in S,
                                                                    /',
                                                                                            t



dy* R for all s /. Consequently, R \d for every (otherwise d = R), whence
                       /                                  \                             /
                                                                                                                                               Corollary 2.21. The following conditions on a commutative ring                                                         R with identity
                                                                                                                                               1r 5^             are equivalent.
U $ U C» = C- Therefore, C ?± R and hence, C e S. Clearly C is an upper bound of
the chain 6. Thus the hypotheses of Zorn's Lemma are satisfied and hence S contains                                                                   (i)        R is a field;
a maximal element. But a maximal element of S is obviously a maximal [left] ideal in                                                                 (ii)        R has no proper ideals;
R that contains A.                                                                                                                                   (iii)         is a   maximal ideal in R;
                                                                                                                                                     (iv)        every nonzero homomorphism of rings R                                       — S is a monomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              >




Theorem 2.19. IfR is a commutative ring such that R 2 = R (in particular if R has an                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                     REMARK. The analogue of Corollary 2.21 for division rings is false (Exercise 9).
identity), then every maximal ideal                     M     in   R is prime.
                                                                                                                                                     PROOF OF 2.21. This result may be proved directly (Exercise 7) or as follows.
      REMARK. The converse of Theorem 2.19 is false. For example,                                                   is   a   prime             R^R/0     is a field if and only if is maximal by Theorem 2.20. But clearly     is maxi-

ideal in Z, but not a maximal ideal. See also Exercise 9.                                                                                      mal if and only if R has no proper ideals. Finally, for every ideal I(^R) the canonical
                                                                                                                                               map 7t R — R/I is a nonzero homomorphism with kernel / (Theorem 2.8). Since t
                                                                                                                                                             :       >


      PROOF OF 2.19. Suppose ab e M but a \ M and b \ M. Then each of the ideals                                                               is a monomorphism if and only if / =
                                                                                                                                                                                    0, (iv) holds if and only if R has no proper
M+       (a) and   M+            (b) properly contains M. By maximality                           M+   (a)   = R =       M+       (/?).        ideals.

Since R is commutative and 06 e M, Theorem 2.5 implies that (a)(b)                                         C (ab) (Z M.
Therefore,        R = R = (M + (a))(M + (b)) (Z M +
                                 2                                                 2
                                                                                                    + M(« +       C M.                               Wenow consider (direct) products in the category of rings. Their existence and
This contradicts the fact that  M ^ R (since M is maximal). Therefore, a e M or                                                                basic properties are easily proved, using the corresponding facts for groups. Co-

b e M, whence          M     is      prime by Theorem 2.15.                                                                                    products of rings, however, are decidedly more complicated. Furthermore co-
                                                                                                                                               products in the category of rings are of less use than, for example, coproducts (direct
                                                                                                                                               sums) in the category of abelian groups.
      Maximal ideals, like prime ideals, may be characterized in terms of their quotient
rings.

                                                                                                                                               Theorem 2.22. Let                    {           £   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1   e I }    be a nonempty family of rings and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YL R the direct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ui
Theorem 2.20. Let M be an ideal in a ring R with identity 1 R 5^ 0.                                                                            product of the additive abelian groups Rr,
                                                                                                                                                                                               a




130                                                                                CHAPTER 111                     RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.      IDEALS                                                                                                                                        131



                                                                                                                                                                             =                                                                       If R is a ring and A u     A n are ideals in R that satisfy the hypotheses of Theo-
                YL Ri is a ring with multiplication defined by {ai}                                                                                                {bi}»i              aibi } ie i;                                                                                            .   .    .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                   {
      (i)                                                                                                                                          it i

                iei                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rem 2.24, then R is said to be the (internal) direct product of the ideals Ai. As in the
      (ii)      //Ri has an identity [resp. is commutative] for every i £ I, then |1 Ri has an                                                                                                                                                   case of groups, there is a distinction between internal and external direct products.

identity [resp. is commutative];
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 If a ring           R is the internal direct product of ideals A u                                                                        .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A n then each of the Ai is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,




      (iii)     for each k el the canonical projection ?r k                                                            :
                                                                                                                           II Ri               — R k given by                              {       £ }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |— ak w         >        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 actually an ideal contained in R and R is isomorphic to the external direct product
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ai X    •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X A n However, the external direct product A X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X A n does not contain
an epimorphism of rings;                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the Ai, but only isomorphic copies of them (namely the i,(Aj)                                                                                                                                 — see Theorem                        2.22).
   (iv) /or each kel r/ze canonical injection                                                                      ik      :   Rk — II Ri,                                                 ^ ak ^                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ai l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Since this distinction    unimportant in practice, the adjectives "internal" and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "external" will be omitted whenever the context is clear and the following notation
(where da =                       for i 5^ k), /$ a monomorphism of rings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 will be used.

      PROOF. Exercise.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NOTATION. We write R = II A, or R = A X A X                                                                                  x                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X A n to indicate that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the ring R is the internal direct product of its ideals A u                                                                                                                                   An
      H
      16/
                Ri is called the (external) direct product of the family of rings                                                                                             {
                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri   :
                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                               i   e /} . If the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,             .




index set is finite, say / =                                      {   1,       .       .       .
                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                       n}, then we sometimes write Ri                                        XR X          2                 •           •       •   X R,           Other characterizations of finite direct products are given in Exercise 24.
instead of
      If ( Ri
                          H
                          /
                                  Ri.
                              e /} is a family of rings                                                 and for each / e /, A                      {       is       an ideal in Ri, then it is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We close this section with a result that will be needed in Chapters VIII and IX.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Let A be an ideal in a ring R and a,beR. The element a is said to be congruent to b
                      I




easy to see that II A { is an ideal in JJ Ri. If A { =                                                                                         for all /                ^ k, then the ideal                                                      modulo A (denoted a = b (mod A)) if a — be. 4 Thus                                                                           .


                                            iei                                                              iei

H
iei
      /4, is      precisely i k (A k ). If the index set / is finite and each R { has an identity, then                                                                                                                                                                  a = b (mod A)                          <=>             a — be A                                  <=>          a       + A = b + A.
every ideal in Y[ R < is of the form II^ 1 with Ai an ideal in ^ l (Exercise 22).                                                                                                                                                                Since R/A is a ring by Theorem 2.7,
                                      iei                                                              te/

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a\    = a (mod A)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                                     and         bi   = b (mod A) =>      2



                            iei} be a nonempty family of rings, S a ring and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tfi   + bi = a + b (mod /4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                2                         and fli&i = a b (mod /*).                                        2           2
Theorem                   2.23. Let                        {Ri    |




{<pi S ->
       :  Ri  £ 1  a family of homomorphisms of rings. Then there is a unique homo-
                              I
                                  i             1




morphism of rings <p S — II Ri such that wnp = <pi for all i £ I. The ring YL Ri is
                                                       :


                                                                      ie/                                                                                                                                                    6/                  Theorem 2.25. (Chinese Remainder Theorem) Let A u      A n be ideals in a ring R
uniquely determined up to isomorphism by this property. In other words                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                    izl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ri is a             such that R 2 + Ai = R for all and Ai + Aj = R /or a// ^ j. //bi,  i      b„ e R,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       .       .       ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i                                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,




product in the category of rings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 then there exists b             eK such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b = bi (mod Ai)                                            (i           = 1,2,               .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n).

   SKETCH OF PROOF. By Theorem 1.8.2 there is a unique homomorphism of                                                                                                                                                                           Furthermore b is uniquely determined up to congruence modulo the ideal
groups :S-+YL R such that *w = & for al1 £ L Verify that ^ is also a ring
                 (p                                    i
                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ai n a 2 n                                        n a„.
                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .


homomorphism. Thus                                                    Ri is a product in the category of rings (Definition 1.7.2)
                                                            iei

and therefore determined up to isomorphism by Theorem 1,7.3.                                                                                                                                                                                        REMARK. If R has an identity, then R = R, whence R + A =                                                 2                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ideal           of R.


Theorem 2.24. Let Ai,A 2        A n be ideals in a ring R such that (i) Ai + A 2 H
                                                                  ,    .   .
                                                                                   h
                                                                                   .
                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.25. Since A + A = R and A,                                                               x                   2                                                                  -\-   A = R,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3

   =
A n R and (ii) for each (1
                         k   < k < n), A k D (Ai +
= 0. Then there is a ring isomorphism R = Ai X A 2 X
                                                           + A k _i + A k+i + + A„)
                                                              X An
                                                                                                                                   •   •   •




                                                                                                                                               •       •       •         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                         •           •       •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R = (A, + ^2X^1 + A,) = ^2 + ^3 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c ^1 + /M c ^ + 04 n ^ ).        3                                2                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ^ + ^3
      PROOF. By the proof of Theorem 1.8.6 the map <p                                                                                                      :       Ai X A 2 X -                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                   X A n --> R                                   Consequently, since                      =                 +R          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,



given by (a u                                                          +a H
                                        h a n is an isomorphism of additive abelian
                                            ,       a n ) h> ai                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r = ^! + * e         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + (a, + 04 n ^                                                        = ^1 + (^ n ^ ) c
groups. We need only verify that (f is a ring homomorphism. Observe that if /     j                                                                                                                                                       ^                                                                                              2                        3 ))                                                                 2                 3



and a e A i9 a, e
            {                                        then by (ii) a,*,- £ A- H ^, = 0. Consequently, for all a,                                                                                                              A       £           Therefore,              = /ii + (A        2       fl       ^ ). Assume inductively that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                          (fll        + «2 H                          H «n)(^l                         + &2 H      h       W = OA                                  H         h «n^n,                                                                                                      r = a, + 04 n ^ n                     2                    8                •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n ^_o-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Then
whence <p is a homomorphism of rings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A



132                                                                                                             CHAPTER III                                       RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.     IDEALS                                                                                       133



       R2 = (a,              + (a n                      2
                                                                       •
                                                                               .   •
                                                                                               n Ak-dXA, +                                                A)c^ + (^n^n---n A                                                                                                       k)                 X       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      X R/A n          ,       tiien there exists    bsR such that 6 = bi (mod A) for all                                                          /.   Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6Q> +C[Ai) = {b                             + A u ...,b + A n = (bi + A u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           )                              .   .    .   ,   bn   + /U, whence                       (9   is    an
and hence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     epimorphism.
                                                         R = R2 + a, d.Ai + (A                                                                                2   PI   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                           D A k ) <Z i?
Therefore,                                                   4- {A 2                       fl           •       •       •
                                                                                                                                    fl    A k ) and the induction step is proved. Con-
sequently,      i?               = A                     l    + (^                         2        fl          •           •            fl A n ) = Ai + (0 ^f). A similar argument                                                                                                                                                                                 EXERCISES
shows that for each k = 1,2,                                                                                .       .           .
                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                         n,       R = A k + (0                                     ^0- Consequently for each A:                                                                        1 .   The set of all nilpotent elements in a commutative ring forms an ideal [see
                                                                                                                                                                      i^k                                                                                                                                     Exercise 1.12].
there exist elements 0* e A k                                                                           and                                   s
                                                                                                                                                  i^k
                                                                                                                                                          A       such that 6* = a k                                                         +        r*.      Furthermore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.     Let / be an ideal in a commutative ring R and let Rad / = \r s R                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s /       for
                         rk              = bk (mod A k )                                                                            and                   =           (mod A )                         {             for                 /       ^ k.                                                        some n) Show that Rad / is an ideal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




Let 6 = n      +r H          2                                     h rn and use the remarks preceding the theorem to verify that                                                                                                                                                                      3.     If       R is a ring and a e R, then 7 = {r e R                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ra       = 0}      is   a   left         ideal            and
b = bi (mod Ai) for every                                                Finally if c e R is such that c s= 6 t (mod
                                                                                    /'.                              for every /,                                                                                                                                                                            K = {r e R ar = 0} is a right ideal in /?.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




then 6 = c (mod A) for each /, whence b — c e A { for all /. Therefore, b — ce f)                                                                                                                                                                                                            A   {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4. If / is a left ideal of R, then ^(/)                         =        r e        |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =         for every x e 1} is an ideal in R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {




and /? = c ^mod                                      H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.     If / is an ideal in a ring R, let [R : /]                         =     {   r e    |   xr s / for every x s                       }   .   Prove that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [R       :   /] is       an ideal of R which contains /.

      The Chinese Remainder Theorem is so named because it is a generalization of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6.     (a)          The center of the ring 5 of all 2 X 2 matrices over a field F consists of all
following fact from elementary number theory, which was known to Chinese mathe-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             matrices of the form
maticians in the first century A.D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b)          The center of S is not an ideal in S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (c)          What is the center of the ring of all n X n matrices over a division ring?
Corollary 2.26. Let mi,m 2         n be positive integers such that (mi,mj) = 1 for         ,       .   .           .       ,
                                                                                                                                    m                                                                                                                                                                 7. (a)           A ring R with identity is a division ring if and only if R has no proper left
it*}. //bi,b 2    b n are any integers, then the system of congruences
                     ,       .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ideals. [Proposition 1.1.3                         may be helpful.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                           = b n {mod m n )                                                                                  (b) If S is a ring (possibly without identity) with no proper left ideals, then either
                 x           = bi {mod mi); x = b {mod m );                                                                                   2                   2
                                                                                                                                                                           •           •   ;       x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S2 =              or 5 is a division ring. [Hint: show that {a eS                                                 Sa = 0}    is       an ideal. If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m = mim -m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




has an integral solution that                                                                                   is                  uniquely determined modulo                                                                                                      2                   n.                   cd 9* 0, show that {r eS                           rd = 0}        =0. Find e eS such that ed = d and show
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             that e is a (two-sided) identity.]

      SKETCH OF PROOF.                                                                                          Let                           A = {mi); then
                                                                                                                                                  {

                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                           f|
                                                                                                                                                                                                           =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^ =                         ('")•      show                    that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.     Let R be a ring with identity and S the ring of all n X « matrices over R. J is an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ideal of S if and only if J is the ring of all n                                  X « matrices over / for some ideal /
(m ,m ) = 1 implies A + A = Z and apply Theorem 2.25.
  t        7                                                   {
                                                                                                -

                                                                                                3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in R. [Hint: Given 7, let / be the set of all those elements of                                                      R that appear as the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             row 1-column 1 entry of some matrix in J. Use the matrices Er>Si where 1 < r < n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 < s < n, and Er 8 has 1^ as the row r-column s entry and       elsewhere. Observe
Corollary 2.27. If A u                                             .       .       .        ,       A n are ideals in a ring R, then there is a monomorphism                                                                                                                                                                                        ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             that for a matrix A = {aij),Ep%r AEStQ is the matrix with a rs in the row p-column
of rings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q entry and    elsewhere.]
                         d : R/(Ai                                     fl              •
                                                                                                            fl                  A n ) -> R/Ai X R/A X                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X R/A„.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9.     Let 5 be the ring of all n X n matrices over a division ring D.
IfR + Ai = R for all
       2
                                                                           i       and A                                    s       + Aj = R for all ^                                     i                j,       then 6 is an isomorphism                                                                     (a)         5 has no proper ideals (that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        maximal ideal). [Hint: apply Exercise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is a

of rings.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8 or argue directly, using the matrices     mentioned there.]           E   r s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (b) 5 has zero divisors. Consequently, (i) S  S/0 is not a division ring and
  SKETCH OF PROOF. By Theorem 2.23 the canonical epimorphisms    R ->                                                                                                                                                                                                       tt a    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (ii)   is a prime ideal which does not satisfy condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (1) of Theorem 2.15.
R/A k {k =  n) induce
               1 ,    a homomorphism
                         .       .   of rings
                                         .
                                              Si R
                                                 ,
                                                   — R/Ai X   X R/  n                                                                                                                                           :                >                              •   •   •




with Bi(r) = {r                   + Au                         .   .       .       ,       r        + An                             ).       Clearly ker 6i = A                                           l    fl     D A n Therefore, 0i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10. (a)          Show that Z is a principal ideal ring [see Theorem 1.3.1].
induces a      monomorphism of rings 6 R/{Ai fl                                                                                                       :
                                                                                                                                                                                   •   •       •   fl          A n ) — R/Ai X     X /?/^n                               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b)      Every homomorphic image of a principal ideal ring is also a principal ideal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ring.
(Theorem 2.9). The map                                                                 (9       need not be surjective (Exercise                                                                                                 26).                 However, if the
hypotheses of Theorem 2.25 are                                                                                                                satisfied           and                  {bi             + Au                  .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,    bn       +A       n) e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (c)      Zm is a principal ideal ring for every m > 0.
                                                                                 .




134                                           CHAPTER III              RINGS                                                                                                                       3.       FACTORIZATION IN COMMUTATIVE RINGS                                                                                                                                                                      135


11. If     N   is the ideal of all nilpotent elements in a                 commutative ring R (see Exercise 1),                             22. (a) If         Ru
                                                                                                                                                                R n are rings with identity and / is an ideal in Pi X
                                                                                                                                                                               .       .   .       ,                  X R n then                                                                                                                                   •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


      then R/N is a ring with no nonzero nilpotent elements.                                                                                      / = Ai        X
                                                                                                                                                              X A m where each A is an ideal in P [Hint: Given / let A k = wk (I),
                                                                                                                                                                               •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                               {                                                       t.

                                                                                                                                                  where w k R X       X R n -> R k is the canonical epimorphism.]
                                                                                                                                                                            :              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                        •   •   •


12.   Let R be a ring without identity and with no zero divisors. Let S be the ring
                                                                                                                                                  (b) Show that the conclusion of (a) need not hold if the rings P do not have
      whose additive group is R X Z as in the proof of Theorem 1.10. Let                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t


                                                                                                                                                  identities.
      A =        {
                     (r,n) e S rx + nx =
                                  |
                                                 for every x e R             |



           (a)       A is an ideal in S.                                                                                                   23.    An element e in a ring R is said to be idempotent if e = e. An element of the                                                                                                               2

           (b) 5/^ has an identity and contains a subring isomorphic to R.                                                                        center of the ring R is said to be central. If e is a central idempotent in a ring R
           (c) S/M has no zero divisors.                                                                                                          with identity, then

13.   Let /          :   R — S be a homomorphism of rings, / an ideal in P, and 7 an ideal in S.                                                     (a)       \   R — e is a central idempotent;
                                                                                                                                                     (b)       eR and (1 R - e)R are ideals in R such that R = eR X (1 R - e)R.
                     f~ (J) is an ideal in P that contains Ker /.
                          l
           (a)
           (b) If /is an epimorphism, then /(/) is an ideal in S. If /is not surjective,/(/)
                                                                                                                                           24.    Idempotent elements e u                                                        .       .     .           en in a ring                                 P [see Exercise 23] are said to be
                                                                                                                                                                                               ^=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,

      need not be an ideal in S.
                                                                                                                                                  orthogonal if                                                          for /           ^ j. If P, P                          1?   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P n are rings with identity, then the
14. If     P is an ideal in a not necessarily commutative ring P, then the following con-                                                         following conditions are equivalent:
      ditions are equivalent.                                                                                                                       (a)    R^R X       X Rn                    x
                                                                                                                                                                                                        •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




             P is a prime ideal.
           (a)                                                                                                                                      (b)    P contains a set of orthogonal                                                                                                           central                       idempotents                          [Exercise                                23]
         (b) If r,s e R are such that rRs CZ P, then r £ P or 5 £ P. [Hint: If (a) holds and                                                      \e u ...,e n                     )       such that e x                         +e H              2                      f-    en =                        1R       and ^P                       ^ P, for each                    /.


      rRs <Z P, then (RrR)(RsR) <Z P, whence PrP C P or RsR <Z P, say RrR <Z P.                                                                     (c)  P is the internal direct product P = ^ X              X A n where each A is an                                                                                  •    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {


      If ^ = (r), then A* <Z PrP <Z P, whence r £ ^ <Z P.]                                                                                        ideal of P such that A ^ P                                             {                   t .



         (c) If (r) and (s) are principal ideals of R such that (r)(.s) CZ P, then r e P or                                                       [tfw/: (a) =* (b) The elements ^ = (1^,0,             0), e = (0,1^,0,      0),    en                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                 2                            .   .       .                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                                ,


      seP.                                                                                                                                        = (0,    .  0,1 Rn ) are orthogonal central idempotents in S = Pi X
                                                                                                                                                                   .   .   ,                                                      X Rn                                                                                                                                             •    •       •




           (d) If             and K are right ideals in R such that UV   P, then U CZ P or V     C
                                                                                                P.                              C                 such that ei-\        h en = s and £ S ^ P (b) => (c) Note that A k = ek R is the  \                               t                  t .


           (e)       If       and F are left ideals in R such that UV CZ P, then   CZ P or K CZ P.                                                principal ideal (e k) in P and that ek R is itself a ring with identity ek                                                                                                                                       .]




15.   The set consisting of zero and all zero divisors in a commutative ring with                                                          25. If   m e Z has a prime decomposition /w = pi -p^                                                                                                     kl -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (A:,     > 0; /? distinct primes),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t

      identity contains at least one prime ideal.                                                                                                                                    Zm ^Zpl X
                                                                                                                                                 then there is an isomorphism of rings                                                                                                                              *i        •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X ZPt k [Hint: Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t.


                                                                                                                                                  2.27.]
16.   Let R be a commutative ring with identity and suppose that the ideal A of R is
      contained in a finite union of prime ideals Pi                             U   •   •   •
                                                                                                 U Pn Show that A CZ P for
                                                                                                             .                   {         26.    IfP = Z,A = (6)and^ 2 = (4), then the map 6 :R/A D A 2 -> R/A l X R/A 2
                                                                                                                                                                                       X                                                                                                                                                      l

      some /. [Hint: otherwise one may assume that A f) P ^zf                                           U P for all j. Let
                                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                 ivy
                                                                                                                       t                          of Corollary 2.27 is not surjective.

      aj e(A f) Pj)               — (U Pi). Then   <?i -f-   a 2 az-   •
                                                                           -a n is in ^ but not in Pi                      U   U P„.]

17.   Let /          :   R — 5 be an epimorphism of rings with kernel
                              >


           (a) If         P is a prime ideal in R that contains K, then /(P) is a prime ideal in S                                         3.    FACTORIZATION IN COMMUTATIVE RINGS
      [see Exercise 13].
                                                                                                                                              In this section we extend the concepts of divisibility, greatest common divisor and
           (b) If         Q is a prime ideal in 5, then f~ (Q) is a prime ideal in P that contains K.
                                                                l

                                                                                                                                           prime in the ring of integers to arbitrary commutative rings and study those integral
           (c)       There is a one-to-one correspondence between the set of all prime ideals
                                                                                                                                           domains in which an analogue of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Intro-
      in   R that contain K and the set of all prime ideals in S, given by P h* /(P).
                                                                                                                                           duction, Theorem 6.7) holds. The chief result is that every principal ideal domain is
        (d) If / is an ideal in a ring P, then every prime ideal in R/I is of the form P//,
                                                                                                                                           such a unique factorization domain. In addition we study those commutative rings
      where P is a prime ideal in R that contains /.
                                                                                                                                           in which an analogue of the division algorithm is valid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (Euclidean rings).
18.   An ideal M =^ P in a commutative ring R with identity is maximal if and only if
      for every r e P — M, there exists x e R such that \r — rx e M.

19.   The ring E of even integers contains a maximal ideal                                           M such that E/M           is    wor   Definition 3.1. A nonzero element a of a commutative ring R is said to divide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              an
      a field.                                                                                                                             element b e R {notation: a b) if there exists x e R such that ax = b. Elements a,b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ofR
                                                                                                                                           are said to be associates //a                                                         b and b                             a.
20. In the ring               Z the following conditions on a nonzero ideal / are equivalent: (i) / is                                                                                                                       |                               |




      prime; (ii) / is maximal; (iii) / = (p) with p prime.
                                                                                                                                                 Virtually all statements about divisibility may be phrased in terms of principal
21.   Determine all prime and maximal ideals in the ringZm                                           .                                     ideals as we now see.
136                                                 CHAPTER III         RINGS                                                               3.   FACTORIZATION IN COMMUTATIVE RINGS                                                                137



Theorem 3.2. Let a,b and u be elements of a commutative ring R with identity.                         c = dx. Since c is irreducible either d\s a unit (whence (d) = R) or x is a unit (whence
                                                                                                      (c)       = (d) by Theorem 3.2). Hence (c) is maximal in 5. Conversely if (c) is maximal in
       (i)    a       |
                          b if and only //(b)   C (a).                                               5, then c is a (nonzero) nonunit in R by Theorem 3.2. If c = ab, then (c)                                                            d (a),
      (ii)    a and b are associates if and only if (a) = (b).                                       whence (c) = (a) or (a) = R. If (a) = R, then a is a unit (Theorem 3.2). If (c) = (a),
              u is a unit if and only if u                 r for all r e R.
      (iii)                                            \
                                                                                                     then a = cy and hence c = ab = cyb. Since R is an integral domain 1 = yb, whence
      (iv) u /j # «/ii7 // a/w/ only //(u) = R.                                                      b is a unit. Therefore, c is irreducible, (iii) If p = ab, then p a or /? b; say /? a.                 \                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                    9

       (v) The relation "a /j aw associate off is an equivalence relation on R.                      Then px = a and p = ab = pxb, which implies that 1 =                Therefore, 6 is a unit,
      (vi) //a = br with r e R <? «w7, r/zcw a aw*/ b are associates. //R z's   integral
                                                                                                     (iv) If /? is irreducible, use (ii), Theorem 2.19 and (i) to show that p is prime, (v) If c is
domain, the converse is true.                                                                        irreducible and d is an associate of c, then c = du with ueRa unit (Theorem 3.2). If
                                                                                                     d = ab, then c = abu, whence a is a unit or bu is a unit. But if bu is a unit, so is b.
      PROOF. Exercise; Theorem 2.5(v) may be helpful for (i) and (ii).                               Hence d is irreducible, (vi) If c is irreducible and a c, then (c) C (a), whence           |




                                                                                                     (c)        = (a) or {a) = R by (ii). Therefore, a is either an associate of c or a unit by
                                                                                                     Theorem 3.2.
Definition 3.3. Let R                    be a commutative ring with identity.   An element co/R is
irreducible provided that:
                                                                                                        We have now developed the analogues in an arbitrary integral domain of the
       (i)    c is a nonzero nonunit;                                                                concepts of divisibility and prime integers in the ring Z. Recall that every element in
      (ii)    c   = ab          =>   a or b is a unit.                                               Z is a product of a finite number of irreducible elements (prime integers or their
                                                                                                     negatives) according to theFundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Introduction,
An element p ofR is prime provided that:                                                             Theorem 6.7). Furthermore this factorization is essentially unique (except for the
                                                                                                     order of the irreducible factors). Consequently, Z is an example of:
       (i)    p is a nonzero nonunit;
      (ii)    p ab =» p a or p b.
                  |                  |          |




      EXAMPLES. If /? is an ordinary prime integer, then both p and —p are irre-                     Definition 3.5.                  An integral domain R is a unique factorization domain provided that:
ducible and prime in Z in the sense of Definition 3.3. In the ringZ6 2 is easily seen to
                                                                                   ,




be a prime. However 2 eZ6 is not irreducible since 2 = 2-4 and neither 2 nor 4 are                              (i)         every nonzero nonunit element a                      of R can be written a = CiC 2               -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -c n ,   with

units inZ6 (indeed they are zero divisors). For an example of an irreducible element                 Ci,    .   .   .
                                                                                                                        ,   c n irreducible.

which is not prime, see Exercise 3.                                                                     (ii) //a = CiC 2 c n and a = did 2
                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                           d m (ci,di irreducible), then n = m and for
                                                                                                                                             •                           -   •




   There is a close connection between prime [resp. irreducible] elements in a ring R                some permutation a of{ 1,2,     nj d and d^i) are associates for every i.
                                                                                                                                                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                 ,   ,



and prime [resp. maximal] principal ideals in R.
                                                                                                                REMARK. Every irreducible element in a unique factorization domain is neces-
                                                                                                     sarily             prime by (ii). Consequently, irreducible and prime elements coincide by
                                                                                                     Theorem 3.4 (iii).
Theorem 3.4. Let p and c be nonzero elements in an integral domain R.
        (i)   p is prime if and only //(p) is nonzero prime ideal;                                       Definition 3.5 is nontrivial in the sense that there are integral domains in which
       (ii)   c is irreducible if and only if (c) is maximal in the set S of all proper principal
                                                                                                     every element is a finite product of irreducible elements, but this factorization is not
ideals of R.
                                                                                                     unique (that is, Definition 3.5 (ii) fails to hold); see Exercise 4. Indeed one of the
      (iii)Every prime element ofR is irreducible.
                                                                                                     historical reasons for introducing the concept of ideal was to obtain some sort of
      (iv) //R is a principal ideal domain, then p is prime if and only ifp is irreducible.
                                                                                                     unique factorization theorems (for ideals) in rings of algebraic integers in which
       (v) Every associate of an irreducible [resp. prime] element ofR is irreducible
                                                                                                     factorization of elements was not necessarily unique; see Chapter VIII.
[resp. prime].
                                                                                                         In view of the relationship between irreducible elements and principal ideals
      (vi)    The only divisors of an irreducible element ofR are its associates and the             (Theorem 3.4) and the example of the integers, it seems plausible that every principal
units ofR.
                                                                                                     ideal domain is a unique factorization domain. In order to prove that this is indeed
                                                                                                     the case we need:
      REMARK. Several parts of Theorem 3.4 are true for any commutative ring with
identity, as is seen in the following proof.



      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.4. (i) Use Definition 3.3 and Theorem 2.15. (ii) If                       Lemma 3.6. IfR is a principal ideal ring and (ai) d (a ) <Z                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                is a chain   of ideals in
c is irreducible then (c) is a proper ideal of R by Theorem 3.2. If (c) <Z (d), then
                                                                                                     R, then for some positive integer n, (aj) = (a n ) for all j > n.
                                                                                      ,




138                                      CHAPTER III              RINGS                                                                                               3.    FACTORIZATION IN COMMUTATIVE RINGS                                                          139



      PROOF. Let A = IJ fe). We claim that A is an ideal. If b,c e A, then b e (a )                                               x        Finally if cic 2 c n = a = JiJ2
                                                                                                                                                                  -   •
                                                                                                                                                                               (c   irreducible), then Ci divides some di by
                                                                                                                                                                                            -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                             t-,</,-

                          i>\                                                                                                         Theorem 3.4(iv). Since c is a nonunit, it must be an associate of di by Theorem 3.4
and c e (a,-). Either / < j or / > j; say / > j. Consequently (a )   (cii) and b,c e (ai).3
                                                                                               d                                                                               x



                                                                                                                                      (vi). The proof of uniqueness is now completed by a routine inductive argument.
Since (a t-) is an ideal b — c e (a ) (Z ^. Similarly
                                              t
                                                            and 6 e ^, then b e (a -),
                                                                      if r s                                                  t


whence r6 e (« ) (Z ^ and br e (#,) (Z ^. Therefore, ^ is an ideal by Theorem 2.2.
                t
                                                                                                                                            Several important integral domains that we shall meet frequently have certain
By hypothesis A is principal, say A = (a). Since # s A = U( fl *)» a £       f° r some
                                                                                                                                      properties not shared by all integral domains.
By Definition 2.4 (a) C {aj. Therefore, for every j > n, (a) C (a n) C (a3) C A =
(a), whence (a^ = (a n).

                                                                                                                                      Definition 3.8. Let N be the set of nonnegative integers and R a commutative ring.
                                                                                                                                      R is a Euclidean ring // there is a function <p R — {0} —> N such that:      :




Theorem 3.7. £tfery principal ideal domain R /j a unique factorization domain.                                                              (i)    z/a,b e R and ab 0, then <p(a) < ^(ab);
                                                                                                                                            (ii)   // a,b s R andb 9^ 0, then there exist q,r e R such that a = qb + r with r = 0,
      REMARK. The converse of Theorem 3.7 is false. For example the polynomial                                                              or r ?±       a/w/ ^?(r) < ^?(b).
ring Z[x] can be shown to be a unique factorization domain (Theorem 6.14 below),                                                      y4   Euclidean      ing which is an integral domain is called a Euclidean domain.
but Z[x] is not a principal ideal domain (Exercise 6.1).
                                                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. The ring Z of integers with <p(x) = \x\ is a Euclidean domain.
      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.7. Let S be the set of all nonzero nonunit ele-
ments of R which cannot be factored as a finite product of irreducible elements.                                                            EXAMPLE. If F is a field, let <p(x) = 1 for all x e F, a ^ 0. Then F is a Euclidean     :




We shall first show that S is empty, whence every nonzero nonunit element of R has                                                    domain.
at least one factorization as a finite product of irreducibles. Suppose S is not empty
and a e S. Then (a) is a proper ideal by Theorem 3.2(iv) and is contained in a maximal                                                      EXAMPLE. If F is a field, then the ring of polynomials in one variable F[x] is a
ideal (c) by Theorem 2.18. The element c e                 R is irreducible by Theorem 3.4(H). Since                                  Euclidean domain with cp( f) = degree of /; see Corollary 6.4 below.
(a) <Z (c), c divides a. Therefore, it is possible to choose for each a e S an irreducible
divisor c a of a (Axiom of Choice). Since R is an integral domain, c a uniquely deter-                                                     EXAMPLE.                   Let    Z[/J   be the              following      subset       of the           complex numbers
mines a nonzero x a e R such that c a x a = a. We claim that x a eS. For if x a were a                                                       = \a + bi        \
                                                                                                                                                                  a, beZi}. Z[i] is an integral domain called the domain of Gaussian
unit, then a = c a x a would be irreducible by Theorems 3.2(vi) and 3.4(v). If x a is a non-                                          integers. Define cp(a                + bi) = a + b Clearly (f(a +
                                                                                                                                                                                        2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .                               ^         if #   + bi ^ 0;   it is also

unit and not in 5, then x a has a factorization as a product of irreducibles, whence a                                                easy to show that condition (i) of the definition is satisfied. The proof that <p satisfies
also does. Since a eS this is a contradiction. Hence x a eS. Furthermore, we claim                                                    condition (ii) is left to the reader (Exercise 6).
that the ideal (a) is properly contained in the ideal (x a ). Since x a                            \
                                                                                                       a, (a) (Z (x a) by
Theorem      3.2(i). But (a) = (x a ) implies that x a = ay for some y e R, whence

a = x a c a ~ ayc a and 1 = yc a This contradicts the. fact that c a is irreducible (and
                                     .
                                                                                                                                      Theorem 3.9. Every Euclidean ring R is a principal ideal ring with identity. Con-
hence a nonunit). Therefore (a) CI (x a ).                                                                                            sequently every Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain.


                                                                                                                                           REMARK. The converse of Theorem 3.9 is false since there are principal ideal
    The preceding remarks show that the function / :S—>S given by f(a) = xa is                                                        domains that are not Euclidean domains (Exercise 8).
well defined. By the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction (with / = fn for all n)
there exists a function <p     :   N — S such that
                                         >
                                                                                                                                           PROOF OF 3.9. If / is a nonzero ideal in R, choose a s / such that (p(a) is the
                    <p(0)   = a and           <p(n   + 1) = /(<p(/2)) = **<») (i > 0).                                                least integer in the set                              <p(x) x
                                                                                                                                                                              of nonnegative integers   0; x e I\ If b e /, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       j        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .



                                                                                                                                      b = qa       + r with r =                     ^
                                                                                                                                                                        and (p(r) < (p(a). Since be I and qael,r is necessarily
                                                                                                                                                                            or r
If we denote <p(«) by a n , we thus have a sequence of elements of S:a,ai,a2,                              .   .   .   such that      in /. Since <p(r) < <p(a) would contradict the choice of a, we must have r = 0, whence
                                                                                                                                      b = qa. Consequently, by Theorem 2.5 / <Z Ra (Z (a)                                   d           /.   Therefore / = Ra = (a)
                                                                                                                                      and R is a principal ideal ring.
Consequently, the preceding paragraph shows that there                                    is   an ascending chain                        Since R itself is an ideal, R = Ra for some as R. Consequently, a = ea = ae for
of ideals                                                                                                                             some e e R. If be R = Ra, then b = xa for some x e R. Therefore, be = (xa)e
                                                                                                                                      = x(ae) = xa = b, whence e is a multiplicative identity element for R. The last
                               (a)   (Z ( ai ) <Z (tf 2 ) <Z ( fl8 ) (Z   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                      statement of the theorem is now an immediate consequence of Theorem 3.7.
                                         »^            5     7^
                                                     T*




contradicting Lemma 3.6. Therefore, the set S must be empty, whence every nonzero                                                        We close this section with some further observations on divisibility that will be
nonunit element in R has a factorization as a finite product of irreducibles.                                                         used occasionally in the sequel (Sections 5, 6 and IV.6).
                                                                                                                                                                              .




140                                                                                               CHAPTER III                                               RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                     3.                  FACTORIZATION IN COMMUTATIVE RINGS                                                                                141



Definition 3.10. Let X be a nonempty subset of a commutative ring R. An element                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5.    Let R be a principal ideal domain.
d e R                is      a greatest common divisor ofX provided:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a)   Every proper ideal is a product PiP2                                                           -   •       Pn of maximal ideals, which are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 uniquely determined up to order.
             (i)         d               a for alia eX;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) An ideal P in R is said to be primary if ab e P and a 4 P imply b n e P for
                                     |




         (ii)            c               a for all a e X                              =>          c               d.
                                 |
                                                                                                          |


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 some n. Show that P is primary if and only if for some n,P = (/? n), where p e R is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 prime ( = irreducible) or p = 0.
         Greatest common divisors do not always exist. For example, in the ring E of even
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c) If P ,P2         Pn are primary ideals such that P = (p n ')2Lnd the p are
integers 2 has no divisors at all, whence 2 and 4 have no (greatest) common divisor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,           •       .   .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       X                                                                                                                      i      i              ;


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 distinct primes, then          Pn = P fl P D      fl Pn           PP      2   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .

Even when a greatest common divisor of a u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                               need not be unique.                                                                          .   .   .   , a n exists,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (d) Every proper ideal in R can be expressed (uniquely up to order) as the
However, any  two  greatest common     divisors of X are clearly associates by (ii).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 intersection of a finite number of primary ideals.
Furthermore any associate of a greatest common divisor of     is easily seen to be a                                                                                                                         X
greatest common divisor of X. If                                                                              R has an identity and a l9 a 29                                                                              .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a n have 1* as a                                                6. (a) If a   and n are integers, n > 0, then there exist integers and r such that
greatest common divisor, then a x ,a 2                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                           .           .   .   a n are said to be relatively prime.                                                                                                                              a = qn     r, where \r\ < n/2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) The Gaussian integers Z[i] form a Euclidean domain with <p(a + bi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = a 2 + b 2 [Hint: to show that Definition 3.8(ii) holds, first let y = a + £1 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .



Theorem 3.11. Let ai,                                                         .   .   .   ,   a„ be elements of a commutative ring                                                                                                         R with identity.                                                      assume x is a positive integer. By part (a) there are integers such that a = qix + n
             (i)          d e R                     is           a greatest                   common divisor of {ai,                                                              .       .       .         an     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               such that d = nai                                                                 and b = q 2 x + r 2 with |ri| < x/2, |r2 < x/2. Let*? = <?i + a 2 / and r = r + r 2 /;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                                      |                                                              x
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,



H                h r n a n for some r e R // 0/2*/ 0/1/y //(d) = (aO (a 2) H
                                                                          {  h (a n );                                                                                            +                                                                                                                              then >> =             ^+                     r, with r                    =       or <^(r) < cp(x). In the general case, observe that for

             (ii) //R m a principal ideal ring, then a greatest common divisor o/ai,                                                                                                                                                                                    .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    an           x = c + <// ^      and ^ = c — flV,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 0. There are q,r e Z[/] such that
exists and every one is of the form nai                                                                                                +       •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                            +   r n a n (n e R);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = q(xx) + r with r = or <p(r ) < v(xx). Let r = y — qx\ then y = qx + r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and r =   or v?(r) < v?U).]
         (iii)            ifR is a unique factorization domain, then there exists a greatest common
divisor of au                               .   •    •       ,   an   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7.    What are the units in the ring of Gaussian integers Z[/]?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Let R be the following subring of the complex numbers:
         REMARK. Theorem 3.1 l(i) does not state that every greatest common divisor of                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8.


ai,     a n is expressible as a linear combination of ai,
         .   .   .                                                                                                                                                                    .   .       .    ,   a„. In general this is not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R = {a + b(l + \/l9 i)/2                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a,b s Z}. Then                             is   a principal ideal domain
                     ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 that is not a Euclidean domain.
the case (Exercise 6.15). See also Exercise 12.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9.     Let   be a unique factorization domain and d a nonzero element of R. There are
     SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.11. (i) Use Definition 3.10 and Theorem 2.5.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           only a finite number of distinct principal ideals that contain the ideal (d). [Hint:
(ii) follows from (i).(iii) Each a has a factorizations, = cT cT ^"with^,
                                                             n                 ,c                                                                                                                          i2 '
                                                                                              {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "       •                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .       .        t           (d)CZ(k)=>k\ d.]
distinct irreducible elements and each m > 0. Show that d = a c         c kt is a                                                                                                                                                          kl           k7 -       •
                                                                                                                                                   tj                                                                                               2                   t



greatest common divisor of a u                                                                    .   .       .
                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                       a n where k, = min
                                                                                                                                   ,                                                          {       wi„W2?,w 3j                          ,    .   .     .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mn   j) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10. If       R is a unique factorization domain and a,b e                                                                                 are relatively prime and a           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6c,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 then a      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 1 .   Let R be a Euclidean ring and as/?. Then a is a unit in R if and only if>(a) = v?0 a).
                                                                                                              EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12.     Every nonempty set of elements (possibly infinite) in a commutative principal
    1.       A nonzero ideal in a principal ideal domain is maximal if and only if                                                                                                                                                                             it is        prime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ideal ring with identity has a greatest common divisor.

    2.       An integral domain R is a unique factorization domain if and only if every non-                                                                                                                                                                                                             13.     (Euclidean algorithm). Let R be a Euclidean domain with associated function
             zero prime ideal in R contains a nonzero principal ideal that is prime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 if   :   R — {0} — N. If a,b e           >                                        and 6^0, here is a method for finding the greatest
    3.       Let R be the subring {a                                                          + b^lO                                       a,b s Z} of the field of real numbers.                                                                                                               _                common divisor of a and b. By repeated use of Definition 3.8(ii) we have:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                               |




               (a) The map N R-+ Z given by a +
                             2                           2
                                                            10 ^ ( a + ^V^X* ~    :
                                                                                    10 >
             = a - 10b is such that N(uv) = N(u)N(v) for all u,v £ ^ and N(u) = if and
                                                                                                                                                                          W                                                                                                                                            a = q b + r u with n =      or <p(ri) < <p(Z>);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       £ = <7iri + r  with r =     or <p(r ) < <p(ri);            2,                  2                                2
             only if w = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         = r +r       with r =     or <p(r ) < <p(r );
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <? 2
               (b) w is a unit in R if and onlyjf N(u) = ±
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /*i                          2                   3,                  3                                3                  2
                                                                                                                                                                          1


                     (c)                 2, 3, 4                 + \T0 and 4 - V 10 are irreducible elements of R.
                     (d) 2, 3, 4                                 +     and 4 ~      are not P rime elements of R. [Hint: 3-2 = 6
              = ^4 + Vl0)(4 - VlO).]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   = qk+\rk+l + rA+2                                                     r*+ 2 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rk                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    with                               or            <p(rk+2 )    < <p(rk+i);
    4.       Show that in the integral domain of Exercise 3 every element can be factored
             into a product of irreducibles, but this factorization need not be unique (in the
             sense of Definition 3.5 (ii)).
142                                       CHAPTER III             RINGS                                                                               4.     RINGS OF QUOTIENTS AND LOCALIZATION                                                    143



      Let r   = b and let n be the least integer such that rn+i =                          (such an n exists since     is an    equivalence relation. Furthermore ifR has no zero divisors and                                        ^ S,   then
      the (p(r k) form a strictly decreasing sequence of nonnegative integers). Show that
                                                                                                                                                                  (r,s)   ~ (r;s')   <=>       rs'   — r's = 0.
      rn is the greatest     common divisor a and b.
                                                                                                                          PROOF. Exercise.

4.    RINGS OF QUOTIENTS AND LOCALIZATION                                                                                 Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R and                                     ~ the equivalence
      In the first part of this section the familiar construction of the field of rational
                                                                                                                      relation of Theorem 4.2. The equivalence class of (r,s)                                    eR X 5 will be denoted r/s.
numbers from the ring of integers is considerably generalized. The rings of quotients
                                                                                                                      The set of all equivalence classes of R X S under                                  ~ will be denoted by S^R. Verify
                                                                                                                      that
so constructed from any commutative ring are characterized by a universal mapping
property (Theorem 4.5). The last part of this section, which is referred to only oc-                                         (i)    r/s = r'/s'       <=>   Si(rs' — r's) =    for some Si e S;
casionally in the sequel, deals with the (prime) ideal structure of rings of quotients                                     (ii)     tr/ts      = r/s for all r s R and s,t e S;
and introduces localization at a prime ideal.                                                                             (iii)     If        s 5, then S~*R consists of a single equivalence class.




Definition 4.1.      A nonempty subset S of a ring R is multiplicative provided that
                                                                                                                      Theorem 4.3. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R and let S -1 R
                                              a,b e S    =>       ab s S.                                             be the set ofequivalence classes                    o/RXS under the equivalence relation of Theorem 4.2.
                                                                                                                                        _1
      EXAMPLES. The set S of all elements in a nonzero ring with identity that are                                           (i)    S        R is a commutative ring with identity, where addition and multiplication are
                                                                                                                      defined by
not zero divisors is multiplicative. In particular, the set of all nonzero elements in an
integral domain is multiplicative. The set of units in any ring with identity is a                                                             r/s   + r'/s' = (rs' + r's)/ss'                and    (r/sXr'/s') = rr'/ss'.
multiplicative set. If P is a prime ideal in a commutative ring R, then both P and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _1
S = R — P are multiplicative sets by Theorem 2.15.                                                                        (ii)      IfR is a nonzero ring with no zero divisors and                              ^ S, then S        R is an integral
   The motivation for what follows may be seen most easily in the ring Z of integers                                  domain.
                                                                                                                         (iii) IfR is a nonzero ring with no zero divisors and S is the set of all nonzero ele-
and the field Q of rational numbers. The set S of all nonzero integers is clearly a
multiplicative subset of Z. Intuitively the field                      Q   is   thought of as consisting of all       ments ofR, then S -1 R is a field.
fractions a/b with a s     Z and b s 5, subject to the requirement
                         a/b = c/d <=> ad = be (or ad — be = 0).
                                                                                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Once we know that addition and multiplication in
                                                                                                                      S~*R are well-defined binary operations (independent of the choice of r,s,r',s'), the
More precisely, Q may be constructed as follows (details of the proof will be                                         rest of the proof of (i) is routine. In particular, for all s,s' e S, 0/s = 0/s' and 0/s is

supplied later). The relation on the set Z X S defined by                                                             the additive identity. The additive inverse of r/s is —r/s. For any s,s' e 5, s/s = s'/s'
                                                                                                                      and s/s is the multiplicative identity in S~ R.                     l

                                 (a,b)    ~ (e,d)             ad — be =
                                                                                                                          To show that addition is well defined, observe first that since S is multiplicative
                                                                                                                      (rs* + r's)lss' is an element of S~ R. If r/s = r /s and r'/s' = r\/s\
is easily seen to   be an equivalence relation.               Q   is   defined to be the set of equivalence
                                                                                                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                                                                                               we must show
                                                                                                                                                                                                l    l                          ,



classes of    Z X S under this equivalence relation. The equivalence class of (a,b) is                                that {rs' + r's)/ss' = (nsS + n's^/siSi'. By hypothesis there exist s 2 ,ss eS such that
denoted a/b and addition and multiplication are defined in the usual way. One
                                                                                                                                                                                  — ns) = 0,
verifies that these operations are well defined and that                         Q is a field. The map Z — Q   *
                                                                                                                                                                            Si(rsi

                                                                                                                                                                           sfc'si' - n's') = 0.
given by flh> a/1 is easily seen to be a monomorphism (embedding).
      We shall now extend the construction just outlined to an arbitrary multiplicative                               Multiply the first equation by s s s'si' and the second by s 2 ssi. Add the resulting equa-
subset of any commutative ring R (possibly without identity).     We shall construct a                                tions to obtain
commutative ring S~*R with identity and a homomorphism <p s                                  :   R -^>S~ R. If S is
                                                                                                         l




the set of all nonzero elements in an integral domain R, then S~ R will be a field
                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                  + r's)siSi — (nsi' + n'sdss'] = 0.
                                                                                                                                                           SaSzlirs'

(S'iR =    Q if R = Z) and             <p s   will   be a   monomorphism embedding R in S^R.
                                                                                                                      Therefore, (rs' + r's)/ss' = (r^' + r^s^/sisS (since S2S3ES). The proof that
                                                                                                                      multiplication is independent of the choice of r,s,r',s' is similar.
                                                                                                                         (ii)      If   R has no zero divisors and
                                                                                                                                                              $ S, then r/s = 0/s if and only if r =   in R.
Theorem 4.2. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R. The relation                                   Consequently, (r/s)(r'/s') =         R if and only if rr' = in R. Since rr' = if
                                                                                                                                                                          in S~ l
defined on the set   R X S by                                                                                         and only if r = or r' = 0, it follows that S^R is an integral domain, (iii) If r ^ 0,
                         ~              <=>              — r's) =               for some     Si s    S                then the multiplicative inverse of r/s s S~ R is s/r s S~ R.    X                      X
                 (r,s)       (r',s')            Si(rs'
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1




144                                                   CHAPTER III            RINGS                                                                                              4.   RINGS OF QUOTIENTS AND LOCALIZATION                                                                              145



        The ring S~*R in Theorem 4.3 is called the ring of quotients or ring of fractions or                                                g S~*R — > T is another homomorphism such that gvs = /, then for every s e S,
                                                                                                                                                  :




quotient ring of R by S. An important special case occurs when S is the set of all non-                                                     g(<fs(s)) isa unit in T. Consequently, g(<fs(s)~ ) = g(<ps(s))~ l for every 5e5 by                l




zero elements in an integral domain R. Then S~ X R is a field (Theorem 4.3(iii)) which                                                      Exercise 1.15. Now for each szS, <p s (s) = s 2/s, whence <^sCs) _1 = s/s 2 zS~ 1 R. Thus
is called the quotient field of the integral                       domain R. Thus if R = Z, the quotient field                              for each r/s              eS^R       :




is precisely the field                 Q       of rational numbers. More generally suppose R is any non-
                                                                                                                                                               g(r/s)      = g(<ps(r)<ps(s)- ) = g(<P Mi)g(<p g^s)' ) = g(<p sM)g(<p sis))'
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                                       1                                    1

zero commutative ring and 5 is the set of all nonzero elements of R that are not zero
                                                                                                                                                                           = f(r)f(s)~ =f(r/s). l

divisors. If S is nonempty (as is always the case if                                    R has an identity), then S~*R is
                                                                                                                                            Therefore, f=g.
called the complete (or full) ring of quotients (or fractions) of the ring R.
                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                       Theorem 4.3
                                                                                                                                                To prove the last statement of the theorem let (B be the category whose objects
(iii)       may be rephrased: if a nonzero ring R has no zero divisors, then the complete
                                                                                                                                            are all (f,T), where T is a commutative ring with identity and /     — Ta homomor-
ring of quotients of R is a field. Clearly the complete ring of quotients of an integral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :



                                                                                                                                            phism of rings such that f(s) is a unit in T for every s e S. Define a morphism in C
domain is just its quotient field.
                                                                                                                                            from (f,Ti) to (^,r2) to be a homomorphism of rings g 7\ —> T2 such that g/i = /2
         Z — Q is the map given by n f-» n/l, then is clearly a monomorphism
        If <p              >                                                                 <p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :                                             .




                                                                                                                                            Verify that C is a category and that a morphism g in C (/i,7\) — (/2 ,r2) is an equiv-
                   :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >
that embeds Z in Q. Furthermore, for every nonzero n, (f(n) is a unit in Q. More
                                                                                                                                            alence if and only if g Ti —> T2 is an isomorphism of rings. The preceding paragraph
                                                                                                                                                                                     :
generally, we have:
                                                                                                                                            shows that (<^ 5 ,^ _1 ^) is a universal object in the category C, whence                                                                          is   com-
                                                                                                                                            pletely determined up to isomorphism by Theorem 1.7.10.

Theorem 4.4. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R.
            (i)     R — S -1 R given by r }— rs/s (for any s e S) is a well-defined
                   The map <ps         :         >                           >
                                                                                                                                            Corollary 4.6. Let R be an integral domain considered as a subring of its quotient
homomorphism of rings such that <£s(s) is a unit in S _1 R for every s e S.                                                                                                                      R — E a monomorphism of rings, then there is a unique
                                                                                                                                            field F. 7/E is a field and f                       :             >

          IfO $ S
            (ii)      S contains no zero divisors, then <ps is a monomorphism. In par-                                                                                                          F —> E such that f R = f In particular any field Ei con-
                                                                                                                                            monomorphism offields f                         :                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .


ticular, any integral domain may be embedded in its quotient field.
                                                                                                                                            taining          R contains an isomorphic copy Fi ofF with R C Fi C Ej.
    (iii) IfR has an identity and S consists of units, then <fs is an isomorphism. In par-

ticular, the complete ring ofquotients (                         = quotient field) of a field F is isomorphic to F.
                                                                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. Let 5* be the set of all nonzero elements of R and apply
                                                                                                                                            Theorem 4.5 to /: R —> E. Then there is a homomorphism / S~ R = F — E such                                             :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l

        SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) If s,s' e S, then rs/s = rs'/s', whence                                               <p s is       well de-
                                                                                                                                            that ftps = fi Verify that /is a monomorphism. Since R is identified with <ps(R), this
fined. Verify that <ps is a ring homomorphism and that for each s eS, s/s
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                             eS^R is
                                                                                                                                            means that f R = f. The last statement of the theorem is the special case when
the multiplicative inverse of s 2/s =                                                If <ps(r)    = rs/s =         in S~ R, then
                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                                      \




                                                                                                                                            / R —> Ei is the inclusion map.
                                                                 <fs(s).   (ii)
                                                                                                                                              :

rs/s = 0/s, whence rs Si                   2
                                                =    for some Si e 5. Since s $i e S, s s2           2
                                                                                                         x   ^ 0. Since 5 has no
zero divisors, we must have r = 0. (iii) <p s is a monomorphism by (ii). If r/s eS^R
                                                                                                                                                      Theorems 4.7-4.11 deal with the ideal structure of rings of quotients. This
with s a unit in                      then r/s = <p sirs' ), whence <ps is an epimorphism.
                                                             1


                                                                                                                                            material will be used only in Section VIII.6. Theorem 4.13, which does not depend
                                                                                                                                            on Theorems 4.7-4.11, will be referred to in the sequel.
        In view of Theorem 4.4 (ii) it is customary to identify an integral domain R with
its     image under <p s and to consider R as a subring of its quotient field. Since 1^ e S in
             R is thus identified with r/\ R zS~ R.
this case, r e
                                                                                 l                                                          Theorem 4.7. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R.
   The next theorem shows that rings of quotients may be completely characterized                                                                                                                                 _1
                                                                                                                                                      (i)    If I is an ideal in R, then S                             I   =   {   a/s a e I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ;   s e     S } is an ideal in S_1 R.
by a universal mapping property. This theorem is sometimes used as a definition of                                                                    (ii)   If] is another ideal in R, then
the ring of quotients.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    S-i(I         + J) = S-q + S-!J;
                                                                                                                                                                                                      S->(D) = (S" 1 I)(S- 1 J);
Theorem 4.5. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R and let T be                                                                                                                  s-i(i         n j) = s-!i n s-!j.
any commutative ring with identity. Iff:R—>Tisa homomorphism of rings such that
f(s) is           a unit in T for all s e S, then there exists a unique homomorphism of rings                                                  REMARKS. S~ l I is called the extension of / in S~ l R. Note that r/s s S" 1 / need
  S _1 R — T such that f<p s = f. The ring S
                                                       _1
f   :                                                     R is completely determined (up to iso-                                            not imply that re I since it is possible to have a/s = r/s with as I, r$ I.
morphism) by this property.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
        SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that the map / S-'R -* T given_ by f(r/s)                    :                                                        SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.7. Use                                                  the        facts       that     in          S~ R, X)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l



= f(r)f(s)~            l
                               is   a well-defined      homomorphism of rings such                             that f<p s        = /. If                 n        \       m                           m
                                                                                                                                                       ]£ c   *                 iflibj/s)       = X) (fli/ dibs/ s)\ and
        3
            For the noncommutativc analogue, see Definition IX.4.7.                                                                                    l= l       /       y=i                       ;=
                                                                                                                                              s




146                                            CHAPTER III                       RINGS                                                                                             4.       RINGS OF QUOTIENTS AND LOCALIZATION                          147


                                                                                                                                                  in S l R, either (p s (a)eJ or (p s (b)sJ by Theorem 2.15. Consequently, either
                           ]C (Ck/Sk) = ( ]>2 C k SiS2             '   '
                                                                           -Sk-lSk+1'   •   'S t )/siS 2   -   -s   t .           M               a £ (fs~KJ) = P or b e P. Therefore, P is prime by Theorem 2.15.
                           k-1              \k = l                                             /

                                                                                                                                                     Let R be a commutative ring with identity and P a prime ideal of R. Then
Theorem 4.8. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R with identity                                                               S = P — P is a multiplicative subset of R by Theorem 2.15. The ring of quotients
and let I be an ideal ofR. Then S ! = S R if and only ifS fl I 9* 0.
                                                     1                      X                                                                     S~ R is called the localization of R at P and is denoted R P If / is an ideal in P, then
                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .


                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                  the ideal S               / in   R P is denoted IP   .




      PROOF. If ssS fl /, then l s -     = s/seS^I and hence S" / = S^R. Con-
                                                             Iie
                                                                                                                              1



versely, if S = S _1 P, then (ps'KS' !) = R whence <ps(Ir) = a/s for some asI,szS.
                  -1
                       /
                                                         1



Since ^s(l«) = Irs/s we have s si = assi for some si eS. But s Si e5 and assi e /
                                                 2                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                  Theorem 4.11. Let P be a prime ideal in a commutative ring R with identity.
imply S C\ I?* 0.
                                                                                                                                                         (i)       There is a one-to-one correspondence between the set ofprime ideals ofR which
                                                                                                                                                  are contained in P and the set ofprime ideals c?/Rp, given by                       Q |— Qp;
   In order to characterize the prime ideals in a ring of quotients we need a lemma.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >

                                                                                                                                                                   the ideal Pp in Rp is the unique maximal ideal ofR?.
Recall that if J is an ideal in a ring of quotients S~*R, then <ps~ (J) is an ideal in R
                                                                   l                                                                                     (ii)


(Exercise 2.13). (fs~\J) is sometimes called the contraction of J in R.
                                                                                                                                                     PROOF. Since the prime ideals of-P contained in P are precisely those which are
                                                                                                                                                  disjoint fromS = R — P, (i) is an immediate consequence of Theorem 4.10. If Mis a
                                                                                                                                                  maximal ideal of R P then M is prime by Theorem 2.19, whence M = Qp for some
Lemma 4.9. Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R with identity                                                                                                       ,



                                                                                                                                                  prime ideal Q of R with Q d P. But Q CZ P implies Q P CZ PP Since PP ^ R P by         .

and let I be an ideal in R.
                                                                                                                                                  Theorem 4.8, we must have Q P = PP Therefore, PP is the unique maximal ideal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




       (i)   I   C ^(S^I).                                                                                                                        in R P       .




      (ii)   if I = ^ S
                              _1
                                                    S -1 I = J. /«
                                   (J) for some ideal J in                  S _1 R,
                                                                          words every
ideal in S R is of the form S I for some ideal I w R.
           _1                                _1
                                                                                                                                                         Rings with a unique maximal ideal, such as R P in Theorem 4.11, are of some
                                                                                   -1
    (iii) //P /s a prime ideal in R am/S fl P = 0,     S _1 P /j a prime ideal in S R                                                             interest in their own right.
      cps-KS-'P) = P.


   PROOF, (i) If a £ /, then as £ / for every saS. Consequently, (fs(a) = as/ s z S -1 /,                                                         Definition 4.12.                  A local ring is a commutative ring with identity which has a unique
whence a £ ^^(S^ /). Therefore, / C <p s ~KS- I). (ii) Since / = (fs'KJ) every ele-
                                   1                                              l

                                                                                                                                                  maximal ideal.
ment of S~ I is of the form r/s with (p s (r)eJ. Therefore, r/s = (l R /s)(rs/s)
                   l



 = (l R /s)(p s (r) £ J, whence      (Z 7. Conversely, if r/seJ, then <ps(r) = rs/
                                                                                                                                                      REMARK. Since every ideal in a ring with identity is contained in some maximal
 = (r/s)(s 2 /s) £ 7, whence r £ <ps~KJ) = L Thus r/s £ S / and hence J C S -1 /.                      1

                                                                                                                                                  ideal (Theorem 2.18), the unique maximal ideal of a local ringR must contain every
(iii) S~*P is an ideal such that S~ P ^ S'R by Theorem 4.8. If (r/s)(r /s') eS'P,
                                                         l
                                                                                                                                      f


                                                                                                                                                  ideal of R (except of course R itself).
then rr'/ss' = a/t with a £ P, / £ S. Consequently, Sirrr' = Siss'a £ P for some Si £ S.
Since Sit eS and S fl P = 0, Theorem 2.15 implies that rr' £ P, whence reP or
                                                      _1                                                                                                 EXAMPLE. If/? is prime and n > 1, thenZ                        is   a local ring with unique maxi-
r' eP. Thus r/seS~ P or r'/s' sS       P. Therefore, S P is prime by Theorem 2.15.
                                       l                 l                                                                                                                                                        pTl

                                                                                                                                                  mal ideal (p).
Finally P C (ps'KS^P) by (i). Conversely if r £ ^(S^P), then <^(r) £ S~ P. Thus
                                                                                                                                          l



^(r) = rs/s = a/t with a £ P and 5, / £ S. Consequently^ Sistr = sisa £ P for some
5i£5. Since SiSteS and S fl P = 0, reP by Theorem 2.15. Therefore,
es-KS-'P) CP.                    |                                                                                                                Theorem 4.13. IfR is a commutative ring with identity then the following conditions
                                                                                                                                                  are equivalent.

                                                                                                                                                          (i)       R is a local ring;
Theorem 4.10. Let Sbea multiplicative subset ofa commutative ring R with identity.                                                                       (ii)       all nonunits        ofR are contained in some ideal M^R;
Then there is a one-to-one correspondence between the set 11 ofprime ideals ofR which                                                                    (iii)      the nonunits ofR form an ideal.
are disjoint from S and the set                V ofprime ideals o/S _1 R, given by P H S _1 P.
                                                                                                                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF. If / is an ideal of R and a e /, then (a) C / by Theorem
      PROOF. By Lemma 4.9(iii) the assignment P\-^S P defines an injective map                     l
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ R if and only if /consists only of nonunits (Theorem 3.2(iv)).
                                                                                                                                                  2.5. Consequently, /

11 — > V. We need only show that it is surjective as well. Let J be a prime ideal of                                                              (ii) => (iii)    and (iii) => (i) follow from this fact, (i) => (ii) If a £ R is a nonunit, then
S-iR and let P = <ps~KJ). Since S _1 P = J by Lemma 4.9(ii), it suffices to show that                                                             (a) 9^       R. Therefore, (a) (and hence a) is contained in the unique maximal ideal of R
P is prime. If ab z P, then <p s (a)<p s (b) = <fs(ab) £ J since P = <ps~\J). Since 7 is prime                                                    by the remark after Definition 4.12.
                                                                                                                                   .




148                                             CHAPTER III             RINGS                                                                                5.          RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS AND FORMAL POWER SERIES                                                                                                                                                      149



                                                     EXERCISES                                                                                 (iii)   R has a minimal prime ideal which contains all zero divisors, and all non-
                                                                                                                                               units of   R are zero divisors.
 1.   Determine the complete ring of quotients of the ringZn for each n>2.
                                                                                                                                        16.    Every nonzero homomorphic image of a local ring is local.
 2.   Let 5 be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R with identity and let Tbe a
      multiplicative subset of the ring S~ R. Let S* = r e R r/s e T for some s e S
                                                           l
                                                                                                                               }
                                                                                {   |




      Then S*            is   a multiplicative subset of                R and there is a ring isomorphism
      S^R ^ T-^S-'R).                                                                                                                   5.    RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS AND FORMAL POWER SERIES
 3.   (a)    The set E of positive even integers is a multiplicative subset of Z such that                                                We begin by defining and developing notation for polynomials in one indeter-
      £-1 (Z) is the field of rational numbers.                                                                                        minate over a ring R. Next the ring of polynomials in n indeterminates over R is
      (b) State and prove condition(s) on a multiplicative subset S of                           Z which insure                        defined and its basic properties are developed. The last part of the section, which is
                  _1
      that 5           Z is the field of rationals.                                                                                    not needed in the sequel, is a brief introduction to the ring of formal power series in
                                                                                                                                       one indeterminate over R.
 4. If 5 = {2,4} and R = Z6 thenS /? is isomorphic to the field Z
                                 -1
                                            ,                                               3.   Consequently,
      the converse of Theorem 4.3(ii) is false.

 5.   Let R be an integral domain with quotient field F. If r,is an integral domain such                                               Theorem 5.1. Let R be a ring and let R[x] denote the set of all sequences of elements
      that R    T  C          C
                      F, then F is (isomorphic to) the quotient field of T.
                                                                                                                                       ofR (a ,ai, .) such that ai = for all but a finite number of indices i.
                                                                                                                                                             .   .




 6.   Let 5 be a multiplicative subset of an integral domain R such that 4 S. If R is a                                                        (i)     R[x] is a ring with addition and multiplication defined by:
      principal ideal domain [resp. unique factorization domain], then so is S~ R.
                                                                                                                       l



                                                                                                                                                                          (a ,ai,              .    .    .)   + (b ,bi,                            .   .   .)    = (a + b ,ai + bi,                                              .   .       .)
 7.   Let Ri and R 2 be integral domains with quotient fields Fi and F2 respectively. If
               R 2 is an isomorphism, then / extends to an isomorphism F             F2                        l   ^               .
                                                                                                                                       and
      [Hint: Corollary 4.6.]                                                                                                                                                                       (a ,ai,                .       .   .)(b ,bi, .                .   .)       = (c ,Ci,            .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .),



 8.   Let R be a commutative ring with identity, / an ideal of R and ir                           :   R—   >           the
                                                                                                                                       where

      canonical projection.                                                                                                                                          n

            (a) If 5 is a multiplicative subset                of R, then ttS = tt(S) is a multiplicative                                            c.,   = X) a n-ibi = a n b + a n _ibi H
                                                                                                                                                                 1   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              haib n _i        +ab =                         n                    ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k+j = n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a k bj.

      subset of R/I.
            (b)   The mapping 6 S" /? -> (ttS)" ^//) given by r/j h> ir{r)/ir{s) is a well-
                                       :
                                                1              1
                                                                                                                                           (ii) // R is commutative [resp. a ring with identity or a ring with no zero divisors or

      defined function.                                                                                                                an integral domain], then so is R[x].
            (c)   6 is a ring epimorphism with kernel S~ I and hence induces a ring iso-
                                                        l
                                                                                                                                             (iii)     The map R — * R[x] given by r |—> (r,0,0,                                                                                  .   .   .)       is          a monomorphism of rings.
      morphism S- R/S~ I      l    l
                                       ^ (ttS)- ^//).1



                                                                                                                                             PROOF. Exercise. If R has an identity                                                                               1   R then (1 ^,0,0,    .) is an identity in R[x].  .   .


      Let 5 be a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring R with identity. If / is an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,

 9.
                                                                                                                                       Observe that if (a ,ai,                         .   .       .),   (b ,b u                      .   .   .)   e R[x]            and k [resp. j] is the smallest index such
      ideal in R, then S^CRad /)                    = Rad (S" /). [See Exercise 2.2.]
                                                                    1

                                                                                                                                       that a k      ^        [resp.       b j ^ 0], then
10.   Let R be an integral domain and for each maximal ideal   (which is also prime,    M                                                                  (a Q ,a u           -X^oA,                     .   .   .)              = (0,            .   .   .    fi,a k b u a k+ ibj                + a b ]+u        k                    .   .    .).
      of course), consider R M as a subring of the quotient field of R. Show that
       f)R M = R, where the intersection is taken over all maximal ideals      of R.                       M                                 The ring R[x] of Theorem 5.1 is called the ring of polynomials over R. Its elements
11.   Let p be a prime in Z; then (/?) is a prime ideal. What can be said about the rela-                                              are called polynomials. The notation R[x] is explained below. In view of Theorem
      tionship of         Zp and the localization Z )?         (p
                                                                                                                                       5.1(iii) we shall identify R with its isomorphic image in R[x] and write (r,0,0,    .)                                                                                                                                      .   .



                                                                                                                                       simply as r. Note that r(a ,a u   •) = (ra 0i ra u .). We now develop a more familiar
12.   A     commutative ring with identity is local if and only if for all r, s e R, r                 +       s   =       1       R
                                                                                                                                       notation for polynomials.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .                                               .   .




      implies r or s is a unit.

13.   The ring R consisting of all rational numbers with denominators not divisible by
      some (fixed) prime p is a local ring.                                                                                            Theorem 5.2. Let R be a ring with identity and denote by x the element (0,1 R ,0,0,                                                                                                                                         .   .   .)

                                                                                                                                       ofRlx].
14. If      M
            is a maximal ideal in a commutative ring R with identity and n is a positive

      integer, then the ring
                                    n
                                           R/M
                                      has a unique prime ideal and therefore is local.                                                         (i)   x n = (0,0,           .   .   .       ,0,1 R ,0,                 .       .       .),     where 1 R is the (n                              + l)st coordinate.
                                                                                                                                                     Ifr e R, then for each n > 0, rx                                                                           = x n r = (0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
15.   In a commutative ring R                   with identity the following conditions are equivalent:                                        (ii)                                                                                                                                             .       .       .   ,0,r,0,               .    .   .),   where r is the
      (i)   R has a unique prime ideal; (ii) every nonunit is nilpotent (see Exercise 1.12);                                           (n    + l)st coordinate.
150                                                                                            CHAPTER III                    RINGS                                                                                                           5.       RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS AND FORMAL POWER SERIES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         151



        For every nonzero polynomial f in R[x] there exists an integer n e N and ele-
      (iii)                                                                                                                                                                                               that          is,       a function                                           N —> R. For each positive integer n let N n = N X         X N (n                                                                                                                                                               •       •       •




ments a          a„ e R such that f = a x° + aiX H
                  ,   .    .       .       ,
                                                   1
                                                           h anx
                                                                 n
                                                                    The integer n and                                                                       .                                             factors). The elements of                                                         N n are ordered n tuples of elements of N. N n is clearly an
elements 2l\ are unique in the sense that f = b x° + biX H
                                                        1              m
                                                                h b m x (bi e R) implies                                                                                                                  additive abelian monoid under coordinate-wise addition.
m > n; ai = bi/or i = 1,2,          n; and bi =    for n < < m.                        .   .    .   ,
                                                                                                                                               i




      SKETCH OF PROOF. Use induction for (i) and straightforward computation                                                                                                                              Theorem 5.3. Let R be a ring and denote by R[xi,                                                                                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x n ] the set of all functions

            /= (a ,a u
for (ii). (iii) If     e R[x], there must be a largest index n such that a n ^ 0.
                                                                          .   .   .)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          f :         N n — R such that f(u) ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              >                                                                                                 for at most a finite number of elements u o/N n                                                                                                                                                                .




Then a0l a u               .       .       .   ,    a n e R are the desired elements.                                                                                                                                   (i)       R[xi,            .   .   .               x n ] is a ring with addition and multiplication defined by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,




      If   R has an identity, then x° =                                                                 \    R (as in any ring with identity) and we write the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (f+gXu) = f(u) + g(u)                                                                                                       and                    (fg)(u)=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v -\-w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              £         =u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f(v)g(w),


polynomial /= aox°                                                + aix H         1
                                                                                                            h a n x as / = a
                                                                                                                   n             aix H    +  h tfn*
                                                                                                                                                    n It will
                                                                                                                                                              be                 .




convenient to extend the notation of Theorem 5.2 to rings without identity as follows.                                                                                                                    where f,g e R[xi,                                    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           xn   ]   and u e N n                                        .




If R is a ring without identity, then R may be embedded in a ring S with identity by                                                                                                                                   (ii)   //R is commutative [resp. a ring with identity or a ring without zero divisors or
Theorem 1.10. Identify R with its image under the embedding map so that R is a sub-                                                                                                                       an integral domain], then so is R[xi,                                                                                                        .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x n ].
ring of S. Then R[x] is clearly a subring of S[x]. Consequently, every polynomial                                                                                                                                     (iii)       The map                              R —> R[xi,                                           .   .     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x„]                      given by r |-> fr                                                      ,           where                         fr (0,        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   0)                  = r and
/ = {a ,a ,...)£ R[x] may be written uniquely as /= a + a x +           + a n x where                                                                                                                                  =                                                                            N n is a monomorphism of rings.
                                                                                                                                                       x                              n
              l                                                                                                                                    x
                                                                                                                                                                •    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,               f(u)                        for all other u e                                                             ,



aieR C 5, n ^ 0, and x = (0,l s ,0,0,
                               tf           eS[x]. The only important difference                                 .   .   .)

between this and the case when R has an identity is that in this case the element x is                                                                                                                                PROOF. Exercise.
not in R[x],
      Hereafter a polynomial / over a ring R (with or without identity) will always be                                                                                                                       The ring R[x u     jc n of Theorem 5.3 is called the ring of polynomials in n in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .           .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,            ]


written in the form / = a                                                         +                     +
                                                        n
                               aix    a& 2 H     h a n x (a, s R). In this notation addi-                                                                                                                 determinates over R. R is identified with its isomorphic image under the map of
tion and multiplication in R[x] are given by the familiar rules:                                                                                                                                          Theorem 5.3(iii) and considered as a subring of R[x u      x n ]. If n = 1 then R[xi] is                                                                                                                                    .       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,                                                  ,



                                                                              n                             n                     n                                                                       precisely the ring of polynomials as in Theorem 5.1 As in the case of polynomials in                                                                                                                                .




                                                                      2 a^ + X)
                                                                      t   =                             t   =
                                                                                                                         = X) to +
                                                                                                                              i   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                          one indeterminate, there is a more convenient notation for elements of R[x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Let n be a positive integer and for each / = 1,2,      n, let
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ay].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .    .       .   ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,




                                       H a )[H b         <
                                                             xi
                                                                                           i   x3 )     = ]E                           where       a=           ]C                                                                                                                                      * = (0                                                                 0,1,0                                      0)eN»

              n                                                                                                                                                                                           where 1 is the iih coordinate of e                                                                                                      -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t        If k eN, let kei                                                               = (0,                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       0,£,0, ... 0).                                         Then
If   /=
      t =
              2           fli-x;*              £ /?M,             then the elements a { e                                             are called the coefficients of /. The                               every element of                                     N n may be written in the form kiei + k e +                                                                                                                                                     2    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    + k n en          .




element a                   is             called the constant term. Elements of R,                                                                which all have the form
                                                                                                                                                                             n

r    = (r, 0, 0,               .       .       .)       = rx° are                          called            constant             polynomials.         If       /=       S=
                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                 a + xi = # o         +   Theorem 5.4. Let R be a ring with identity and n a positive integer. For each
                                                                                                                                                                                                          i= 1 ,2,   n let x e R[xi,  x n be defined by Xife) = 1r and x (u) = for u ^ £i.
aix H                = an ;t H
                      h an x       h aix + tfo has a n ^ 0, then a n is called the leading
                                                   n                  n                                                                                                                                                           .   .   .   ,                                4                                .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,           ]                                                                                                                                                 t




coefficient of /. If R has an identity and leading coefficient I Ri then /is said to be a                                                                                                                              (i)    For each integer k e N, Xi (k£i) = 1r and Xi (u) =                                                          k                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for u ^ k^;
monic polynomial.                                                                                                                                                                                                     (ii)    for                 each                         (ki,             .   .       .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k n) e Nn                                      \^\ U              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -   •       -x n k »(kiei H                                                                   h knen)               = 1 R and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


    Let R be a ring (with identity). For historical reasons the element x = (0,1/2,0, .)                                                                                                      .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                                                                                          xi 'x 2 k '.       -XnMu) = Ofor u y£ kiei +•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kn en                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;


of R[x] is called an indeterminate. One speaks of polynomials in the indeterminate x.                                                                                                                                 (iii) XiV = XjV for all s,t eN and all i,j = 1,2,                                                                                                                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,    a?;

If S is another ring (with identity), then the indeterminate x e S[x] is not the same ele-                                                                                                                            (iv) XjV = rx, 1 for all r e R and all t s N;

ment as x e R[x]. In context this ambiguous notation will cause no confusion.                                                                                                                                          (\)for every polynomial f in R[x,,                                                                                                  .       .       .   ,x n ] there exist unique elements a kl                                                                                                ,   .       .       ., kn            e R,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
   If R is any ring, it is sometimes convenient to distinguish one copy of the poly-                                                                                                                      indexed by all (k„                                       .       .       .   ,k n ) e             N and nonzero for at most a finite number <9/(k,,                                                                                                                                                                         .   .    .       ,k n ) e
nomial ring over R from another. In this situation the indeterminate in one copy is                                                                                                                       N   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   such that
denoted by one symbol, say x, and in the other copy by a different symbol, say y. In
the latter case the polynomial ring is denoted R[y] and its elements have the form                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = E «v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    K<                            -xS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •                          -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .


a    + aiy H                                       f-   an y n    .




      We shall now define polynomials in more than one indeterminate. For con-                                                                                                                            where the sum is over all (k„                                                                                 .   .    .    ,kj e N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .


venience the discussion here is restricted to the case of a finite number of indeter-
minates. For the general case see Exercise 4. The definition is motivated by the fact
that a polynomial in one indeterminate is by definition a particular kind of sequence,                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF, (v) Let akn .--,*„= f(k, ... kj.                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
152                                                                                                                                            CHAPTER III                                                                       RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                            5.        RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS AND FORMAL POWER SERIES                                                                                                                                                                                                           153


      If     R is a ring with identity, then the elements Xi,x                                                                                                                                                                                                   2,       .       .       .           ,       x n e R[xi, ...,*„] as in                                             phism of rings. Suppose that \p R[x u ...,*„] —>S is a homomorphism such that                          :



Theorem 5.4 are called indeterminates. As in the case of one indeterminate symbols                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \p  R = <p and \p(xi) = j» for each /. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \




different than *i,                                                                       .       .   .       x n may be used to denote indeterminates whenever convenient.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       / m
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \                   m
The elements a 0i a u                                                                                                    a m in Theorem 5.4(v) are called the coefficients of the poly-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VE                                                       £ ^toW*?''
                                                                                                     .   .   .       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *(/) = yp[                                   **f'"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -           -^       ,n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            )-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •




nomial /. A polynomial of the form axi kl x 2   -x n (a e R) is called a monomial in                                                                                                                                    k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     kn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =o                                                /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i=o
*i,*2,     x n Theorem 5.4(v) shows that every polynomial is a sum of monomials. It
            .       .       .       ,                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
is customary to omit those Xi that appear with exponent zero in a monomial. For ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1       =
ample,                      tfoXi .Y2                                x3                          -h aiXi x 2 xz
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                               + a XiX *xz             2                   2                        is           written a                                        + aiXi x + a x x xz. The         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3                   2       Y       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
notation   and terminology of Theorem 5.4 is extended to polynomial ring                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              = Z) ^te)^'                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = *pf(si s              9   2,      .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sn )    = ^(/);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =
           *n], where R has no identity, just as in the case of one indeterminate. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
R[xu        •       •       •
                                    ,



ring R is embedded in a ring 5 with identity and R[x u         Xr,] is considered as a sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   whence \p = <p and ^ is unique. Finally in order to show that R[x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *„] is com-                                                                                                                                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,

ring of S[xu      ,x n ].If R has no identity then the indeterminates x u x 2
                                                                         .          x„ and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   .       .   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pletely determined by this mapping property define a category 6 whose objects are
                                                 .           .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,



the monomials x kl x2 k2       xn kn {k e N) are not elements ofR[x l9 ..., x„].         x
                                                                                                                 •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   all (n + 2)-tuples (i/s^Si,    s n ) where A' is a commutative ring with identity, s £ K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m                                                                                                                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                                                                                                                                                                                                      t



      If        R is any ring, then the map R[xi] —* R[x u ...,*„] defined by 22 tff*VH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and      R — AT is a homomorphism with ^(U) = lx. A morphism in 6 from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \j/             :                       >


 m                                                                                                           m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i       =                           (yp,K,s u                      .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,       j„) to (^,r,/i, ...,/„) is a                                              homomorphism of rings f A'—> Tsuch that                                                      :




53 cnxfxi                                '   •
                                                         -Xn°                                    = X) a x ? 6                i                                                     •   ••»**] is easily seen to be a monomorphism                                                                                                                                                  f(l A )              and f(Si) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = lr,            for / = 1,2,          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n. Verify that f is an equivalence                                                                    .   .   .   ,

t=0                    t=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n] there is a monomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in C if and only if f is an isomorphism of rings. If t   R —»               x n is the in-                                                                                            :                                       .       .       .                               ]
of rings. Similarly, for any subset                                                                                                                                                                                     4} of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                                {   1,2,             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   clusion map, then the first part of the proof shows that (i,R[x u       x n ],xi,      xn )
phism R[x il9   x ik   >                        x ik is usually identified with its
                                                     .           .           .
                                                                                     ,                   ]
                                                                                                             — R[x u                           •       .   .       ,                                                             .       .   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,           ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                                   .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is a universal object in (3. Therefore,          x v is completely determined up to                                                               .   .   .               ]
isomorphic image and considered to be a subring of R[x u       x n ].                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   isomorphism by Theorem 1.7.10.
   Let <p R — 5 be a homomorphism of rings, / £
                                    :                      x„] and Si,s 2
                                                                 >           s n eS.                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .       ,                                            ,       .   .   .       9

                     m
By Theorem 5.4 / = ]C ^J'" 1, •*« " witn  £ ^ and ^> £ N ° mit a11 *«' tnat appear                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -


                                                                                                         i   =                                                                                                                                                                                                     m
with exponent zero. Then <pf(s u s 2i                                                                                                                                          .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               s M ) is defined to                                                            be 22 ^te)^'                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -   •                £ S;   Corollary                                      5.6.           //   <p       :       R— S        >       /j              a homomorphism                                                        of commutative                                                                  rings                            and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       kij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Si,s 2 ,   .       .       .       ,       s n e S,        then the map R[xi,                                               .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 xn]         —* S given by f |— v?f(Si,                                                                          .       .           .               s n ) /J      «
that is, <pf(s u                                         .           .           .
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                 J*) is obtained by substituting v?(tf t ) for # t and s                                                                                                                                                                       for x*"" (fc i;                             > 0).   homomorphism of rings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,




Since the a. and A: i; are uniquely determined (Theorem 5.4), <pf(su                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,   j«) is a well-

defined element of S. If R is a subring of S and <p is the inclusion map, we write
        .       .       .
                                ,
                                        s n ) instead of <pf(s u                                                                                       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                   ,       s n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.6. The proof of Theorem 5.5 showing that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   assignment /|-> <pf(si, s n ) defines a homomorphism is valid even when R and S
    As is the case with most interesting algebraic constructions, the polynomial ring                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   do not have identities.
R[xi,      x n can be characterized by a universal mapping property. The following
            .       .       .
                                    ,            ]


Theorem and its corollaries are true in the noncommutative case if appropriate hy-
potheses are added (Exercise 5). They are also true for rings of polynomials in an in-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 REMARKS. The map R[x u ...,*„]—> S of Corollary 5.6 is called the evaluation
finite number of indeterminates (Exercise 4).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      or substitution homomorphism. Corollary 5.6 may be false if R and 5 are not commu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tative.This is important since Corollary 5.6 is frequently used without explicit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mention. For example, the frequently seen argument that if / = gh (fg,h e R[x]) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c e R, then f(c)     = g(c)h(c), need not be valid if R is not commutative (Exercise 6).
Theorem 5.5. Let R andS be commutative rings with identity and <p R — S a homo-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :                   >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Another consequence of Theorem 5.5 can be illustrated by the following example.
morphism of rings such that <^(1r) = Is- // Si,s     s n e S, then there is a unique                                                                                                                                                     2,      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                                                                                                     Let R be a commutative ring with identity and consider the polynomial
homomorphism of rings <p R[xi,        x„] — S such that Tp R = <p and <p(xi) = Si                                                    :                         .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >                                                                                 |




for     i= 1,2,                                          .           .           .       ,       n.              This                    property completely                                                                                         determines                                                    the polynomial ring                                                                                                            /= x y + x\y +       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + xy + y + r e R[x,y].          2



R[xi,       .       .       .           x n ] up to isomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Observe that /= y 2 +
                                    ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              + x 3 + x)y + (x 4 + r), whence fe R[x][y]. Similarly,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /= + yx + yx + yx + (y 2 r) z R[y][ x ]. This suggests that R[x y] is iso-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x 4    3      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +
      SKETCH OF PROOF. If fe R[x u                                                                                                                                                                     •            •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -*•„],              then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   morphic to both R[x][y] and /*[>'][*]. More generally we have:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                                         z-0

by Theorem 5.4. The map lp given by ^(/) = <pf(s u        s n ) is clearly a well-defined                                                                                                                                                                    •    •       »                                                                                                        Corollary 5.7. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and n a positive integer.
map such that $ R = <p and lp{x ) = s Use the fact that <p is a homomorphism, the    \                                                                     i                               { .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   For each k (1 < k < n) there are isomorphisms ofrings R[xi,   x k ][x k+ i, xn]                                                                                                                      .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                                           .       .       .    ,            =
rules of exponentiation and the Binomial Theorem 1 .6 to verify that £ is a homomor-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R[x l5     x„] . R[x k+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .      x„][xi,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x k ].        ^                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
154                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER IN                                                  RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                                           5.    RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS AND FORMAL POWER SERIES                                                                                                       155



            PROOF. The corollary may be proved by directly constructing the isomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Proposition 5.9. Let R be a ring with identity and f =                                                                      a xi £ R [M]-
phisms or by using the universal mapping property of Theorem 5.5 as follows.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i   =
Given a homomorphism # R — S of commutative rings with identity and                                                                    :                    >

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (i)      f is a unit in R[[x]] if and only if its constant term a                                                    is       a unit in R.
elements s        s n zS, there exists a homomorphism <p
                                             { ,      .   R[x u ...,**] —>S such
                                                              .       .
                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (ii)      //a    is   irreducible in R, then f is irreducible in R[[x]].
that <p R = <p and <p(xd = Si for / = 1,2, ... ,k by Theorem 5.5. Applying
                        |




Theorem 5.5 with R[x u             ,x k in place of R yields a homomorphism                                                    .   .   .                ]



p       :   ,x k [x k +i,    ,x n ]-*S such that p
                                 .       .        .         **] = ^ and pX) =                                      .   .   .                                                                                                         .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   REMARK. If/£ R[[x]] is actually a polynomial with irreducible [resp. unit] con-
                                                                           ]                                                                                                                                    |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             stant term then / need not be irreducible [resp. a unit] in the polynomial ring R[x]
5 for i — k
    t           \,       ,n. By construction ^ R = <p R = <p and p(x ) = Si for
                                                          +                            .       .       .                                                                                           |                    \                                                                                                        t


/       = 1,2,               .       R[x u
                                     .        .AjJta+i,
                                                      ,     x n — > 5 is a homo-
                                                              n.               Suppose                                         that                \p       :              .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,               ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Exercise 8).

morphism such that       R = <p and i/^) = s for / = 1,2,      n. Then the same ar-                \//         \                                                                           t                                                     .           .       .   ,



gument used in the proof of uniqueness in Theorem 5.5 shows that \p R[x\,       xk                                                                                                                                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,       ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PROOF OF 5.9. (i) If there exists g = J^hx* e R[[x]] such that
= lp. Therefore, the uniqueness statement of Theorem 5.5 (applied to R[x i9    x k ])
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fg = gf= l*e *[[*]],
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,



implies that ^ = p. Consequently, R[xi,    x k ][x k+ i,  x n has the desired uni-                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .        .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                   ]



versal mapping property, whence R[x u      x k ][x k+ i, ,x n    R[x u    ,x n by                                                                                      .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .        .           .                           ]       =                                           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it   follows immediately that a b                                = b a = l R whence a is a unit in R. Now suppose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



Theorem 5.5. The other isomorphism is proved similarly.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a    is a      unit in R. If there were an element g =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the following equations would hold:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b x £ R[[x]] such that fg = \ R then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,




            Since R[x u                                               .    .   .       ,
                                                                                               xk          ]       is      usually considered as a subring of R[x u                                                                                                                      .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     xn              ]   (see page                                                                                                                                          a b          = \R
152) it is customary to identify the various polynomial rings in Corollary 5.6 under                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a bi   + aib =
the isomorphisms stated there and write, for example, R[xi,                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x k ][x k+u                                         .       .           .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x„]
= R[x u                      .       .        .       ,x n ].
            We close this section with a brief introduction to rings of formal power series,
which is not needed in the sequel.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a bn      + aibn -i           -\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h Onb          =



Proposition 5.8. Let R be a ring and denote by R[[x]] the set of all sequences of ele-
ments ofR (a ,ai,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Conversely if a solution (b ,bi,bo,                               .   .   .)   for this system of equations in                                        R exists, then
                                                                                   .       .       .).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g = 52 fox* e R[[x]] clearly has the property that fg = \ R Since a                                                                               is       a unit (with
                                                                                                                                           .) +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .

                (i)         R[[x]] is                                          a ring with addition and multiplication defined by: (a ,ai,                                                                                                                                                                                                               .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i   =
                                              = (a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~                                                                                                        ~l
(b ,b u             .   .        .)                                            + b ,ai + bi, .) and (a ,ai, .)(b ,b], .) = (c ,Ci, .), where
                                                                                                                                           .   .                                                        .   .                                        .           .                                                           .       .                                                       multiplicative inverse a                          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ),   the first equation can be solved: b                                            = aQ                 \       similarly,
                    n                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             bi   = a ~\-- aib ) = a ~K — aia ~ ).                        l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Proceeding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6 n _i are              inductively,                      if   b   ,   .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,

Cn          =                        a b n-i
                                         i
                                                                          = X)                                         a kbj.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             determined in terms of the ai, then a bn = —aib n -
                i   =                     —n                                       k-\-j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a n b implies that                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~
             (ii)            The polynomial ring R[x] is a subring o/R[[x]].                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b n = a ( — aibn ^i —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   — an b ). Thus, if a is a unit thrs system of equations can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •   •   •




   (iii) //R is commutative [resp. a ring with identity or a ring with no zero divisors or                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   solved and there is a g such that fg =                                            \   R e R[[x]]. A similar argument shows that
an integral domain], then so is R[[x]].                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      there exists h e R[[x]] such that hf=                                      1 R.       But h = h\ R = h(fg) = (hf)g = \ R g = g,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             whence g is a two-sided inverse of /. Therefore /is a unit in /?[[*]]. (ii) is an immediate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             consequence of (i).
            PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem 5.1.

            The ring R[[x]] of Proposition 5.8 is called the ring of formal power series over the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Corollary 5.10. IfR is a division ring, then the units in R[[x]] are precisely mose
ring R. Its elements are called power series. If R has an identity then the polynomial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       power series with nonzero constant term. The principal ideal (x) consists precisely of the
x = (0,1^,0,                                              .       .       .)   s R[[x]] is called an indeterminate. It is easy to verify that x r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = rx               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nonunits in R[[x]] and is the unique maximal ideal of R[[x]]. Thus ifR is afield, R[[x]] is
for all r s                          R and                                     / s N. If (ao,a u                                           .   .    .) £ R[[x]\,                           then for each n, (a ,au                                                                               •       •       •       ,       a n ,0,0,     .)                                .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a local ring.
is          a polynomial,                                                              whence                                  (a      ,   .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                a n fi,0,          .       .       .)   = a + ax + ax +                  x                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                   •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +a r x n by
Theorem 5.2. Consequently, we shall adopt the following notation. The power series                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROOF. The first statement follows from Proposition 5.9 (i) and the fact that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             every nonzero element of R is a unit. Since x is in the center of R[[x]],
(a ,ai,             .            .)           £ R[[x]] is denoted by the formal                                                                                                        sum X)                       fl »"*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -           Tne elements a are called                                                           {


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M = {xf\feR[[x]]\
                         .




coefficients and a                                                                     is          called the constant term. Just as in the case of polynomials this
notation is used even when R does not have an identity (in which case a- ^ ^[MD-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             by Theorem 2.5. Consequently, every element xf of (x) has zero constant term,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :                                                                      .




156                                                                                         CHAPTER III                    RINGS                                                                                                                                                     6.        FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                                                                                                                        157


whence xfis a nonunit. Conversely every nonunit fe R[[x]] is necessarily of the form
          00                                                                                                  00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of monoids N s                 ^ N given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <p |-> (<p(si),       .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   <p(sn )), where                  S = {s u                                .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jw }J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (f)       State and prove an analogue of Theorem 5.5 for R[S].
f = ^2 d{X with 0o = 0. Let g = ^2 hx* where b% = fl<+i for all
                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                     /.      Then xg = /,
          =                                                                                                  i.=0
      i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.    Let R and 5 be rings with identity, <p                                                           :   R-^S a homomorphism of rings with
whence fe(x). Therefore,                                                             (x)             is       -the   set   of nonunits. Finally, since                                                            \   R £ U),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <pOr) = Is, and s u s2i                       .   .       .   ,sn eS such that SiSj = SjSi for all ij and v?(r)5i = snp(f)
(x)            /*[[*]]. Furthermore, every ideal / of R[[x]] with /                                                                             ^ /?[[*]] necessarily consists                                                                         for all r £         R and all Then there is a unique homomorphism Tp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /.                                                                                                             :                                        x n — > 5 such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       , .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .       ,        ]
of nonunits (Remarks, p. 123). Thus every ideal of R[[x]] except R[[x]} is contained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       that ^|/? = <p and ^(Arf ) = s { This property completely determines   .                                                                                                                                   .       .       .   ,jc n ]
in (x). Therefore, (x) is the unique maximal ideal of R[[x]].                                                                                                                   m                                                                      up to isomorphism.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6. (a)          If       R is the ring of all 2 X 2 matrices over Z, then for any A e R,
                                                                                                     EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             + A)(x - A) = x - A £ /?[*].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (x                                                          2                2


 1.   (a) If <p R —>S is a homomorphism of rings, then the map y R[[x]] —+S[[x]]
                                     :                                                                                                                                               :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (b) There exist C,A e R such that (C + /*)(C - ^) ^ C -                                                                                                2                          2
      given by vi^cnx') = 22<£>(tfi)-* is a homomorphism of rings such that (f(R[x]) C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Therefore,
                                                                                                      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /4              .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Corollary 5.6 is false if the rings involved are not commutative.
      Six].
      (b)          <p    is              a       monomorphism [epimorphism] if and only if <p is. In this case                                                                                                                                   7.   If    R is a commutative ring with identity and / = a n x n H h   is a zero divisor                                                                         tf

      <p       :   R[x] —+ S[jc] is also a monomorphism [epimorphism].                                                                                                                                                                                in R[x], then there exists a nonzero Z> £ R such that n = ban -i =      = ba = 0.                                           Z>tf                                       •           •    •




      (c)          Extend the results of (a) and (b) to the polynomial rings R[x u                                                                                                                            .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x n ],
      S[xi,          .   .       .       x„].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.   (a)        The polynomial * + 1 is a unit in the power series ring Z[[x]], but is not a
                                     ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       unit in Z[x].
 2.   Let Mat n R be the ring of n X n matrices over a ring R. Then for each n > 1                                                                                                                                                                    (b)        * 2 + 3* + 2 is irreducible in Z[[x]], but not in Z[x].
              (a)        (Mat n /?)M                   ^ Mat„/?M.
              (b) (Mat»J?)[M] 9* Mat n /?[M].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9. If         F is a field, then (x) is a maximal ideal in F[x], but it is not the only maximal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ideal (compare Corollary 5.10).
 3.   Let                be a ring and G an infinite multiplicative cyclic group with generator de-
      noted x. Is the group ring R(G) (see page 117) isomorphic to the polynomial                                                                                                                                                           10. (a) If                F is a field then every nonzero element of F[[x]] is of the form x k u with
      ring in one indeterminate over i??                                                                                                                                                                                                              u £ F[[x]] a unit.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) F[[x]] is a principal ideal domain whose only ideals are 0, F[[x]]                                                                                                         = (1 F) = (*°)
 4. (a)            Let 5 be a nonempty set and let                                                                     be the set of all functions <p                                         :   S — N such      >                                   and (x k ) for each /: > 1
      that (p(s)                         ^        for at most a finite number of elements s e S. Then                                                                                        N s is a multi-
      plicative abelian monoid with product defined by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 1 .     Let  6 be the category with objects all commutative rings with identity and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      morphisms all ring homomorphisms f:R-^S such that f(l R ) = l s Then                                                                                                                                    .



                                                           (<p+)(s)                         = rfj) + Ms) (<P,t eN s ;se 5).                                                                                                                           the polynomial ring Z[x u     x n is a free object on the set *i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .  x n in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,            ]                                                              {          .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,           }


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      category Q. [Hint: for any R in 6 the map Z-^ R given by n H /il^ is a ring
      The identity element in N 5 is the zero function.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >




      (b) For each x e S and / e N let x e N s be defined by jc (jc) = / and x (s) =                          {                                                 1                                     {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      homomorphism; use Theorem 5.5.]
                                                                                        for
      s 5* x. If <p e N and *i,
                       5              x n are the only elements of 5 such that <p(xi) j± 0,
                                                                                .       .   .   ,


      then in N 5 <p = x\ x 2 i2 x n in where ij = (f(xj).
                                             ,
                                                           il
                                                                        -           •
                                                                                                         ,



      (c) If R is a ring with identity let R[S] be the set of all functions                                                                                                         f:N s —*R such
      that f(ip)       for at most a finite number of <p e      5 Then /?[S]                                                            N               .                                    is       a ring with                           6.        FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS
      identity, where addition and multiplication are defined as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We now consider the topics introduced in Section 3 (divisibility, irreducibility,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and unique factorization) in the context of polynomial rings over a commutative
                                                   (/+ g)(<p) = A<p) + g(<p) (f,g e R[S];<p e N 5 );
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ring. We begin with two basic tools: the concept of the degree of a polynomial and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the division algorithm. Factors of degree one of a polynomial are then studied;
      where the sum is over all pairs (0,f) such that 0f = cp. R[S] is called the ring of                                                                                                                                                   finding such factors is equivalent to finding roots of the polynomial. Finally we con-
      polynomials in S over R.                                                                                                                                                                                                              sider irreducible factors of higher degree: Eisenstein's irreducibility criterion                                                                                                                                                           is
      (d) For each (p                             =x   x
                                                           il
                                                                •   •       •
                                                                                        xn      in
                                                                                                     e       N s and each reRwe denote by rx h                                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                  •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      xn      in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the      proved and it is shown that the polynomial domain D[x u                                                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,   xn   ]   is a unique factor-
      function                       Ns             R which is r at <p and                                            elsewhere. Then every nonzero element /                                                                               ization domain if                    D    is.
                                                                                                                       m                                                                                                                              Let R be a ring. The degree of a nonzero monomial ax^xj**-                                                                                         •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -x n kn e R[x u ...,*„]
      of R[S] can be written in the form /=                                                                                ^jc^jcJ' 2   •       •           •
                                                                                                                                                                    x kn   in
                                                                                                                                                                                with the r e R, x e S t                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is    the nonnegative integer ki                                             +        k 2 -\               h kn     .       If       / is a nonzero polynomial in
      and                e           N all uniquely determined.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m
      (e)          If S is finite of cardinality n, then R[S]     x n ]. [Hint: if N n is con-                              = R[xi,         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R[x lt      .    .   .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xn ], then / =        ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i'   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a,x\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .   .    .       4" by Theorem 5.4. The (total) degree of the
      sidered as an additive abelian monoid as in the text, then there is an isomorphism                                                                                                                                                    polynomial / is the                       maximum of the degrees of the monomials a^                                                                                                 1                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .        .   .   x^                  such
158                                                                             CHAPTER III                 RINGS                                                                                                  6.    FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                                           159


that ai 7±   = 1,2, ... m). The (total) degree of / is denoted deg /. Clearly a
                               (/                                   ,                                                                                                                             /- {an bm- x n - m)g = {an x n +
                                                                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + a - {anx n +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q)                      •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 + Onb^boX^)
nonzero polynomial / has degree zero if and only if / is a constant polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                  isa polynomial of degree less than n. By the induction hypothesis there are poly-
f = a = aoXi -x n °. A polynomial which is a sum of monomials, each of which has
                                    -   -



                                                                                                                                                                                  nomials q' and r such that
degree k, is said to be homogeneous of degree k. Recall that for each k (1                                                                                     < k < n),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~   '
R[x u       .   .   .   ,
                              x n is a subring of R[x u ...,*„] (see page 152). The degree
                            x k _ h x k+ i,         .   .   .
                                                                ,       ]                                                                                                                                    / — {a n bm x n m)g = q'g + r and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                deg r < deg g.
of f in Xk is the degree of / considered as a polynomial in one indeterminate x k over
                                                                                                                                                                                  Therefore, if q = a n bm~ x                 n-m
the ring R[x u       x k -i,x k+u   .   x n ).
                                        •   •
                                                ,
                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + a', then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /= {a n bm- x n - m)g + q'g + r = qg + r.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l



       EXAMPLE. The polynomial Ixfx^xz + 3xix - 6jt x e Z[x] has degree 2 in                       2
                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                    (Uniqueness) Suppose /= q g     r u and / = q&                          +                                   + r with deg n < deg g and
xi, degree 3 in x 2 , degree 4 in x z and total degree 6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y                                                    2

                                                                                                                                                                                 deg r 2 < deg g. Then qjg n = <?2g           +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r 2 implies                               +
   For technical reasons it is convenient to define the degree of the zero polynomial                                                                                                                                                        (<7i           - qJg = r - n.        2

to be— oo and to adopt the following conventions about the symbol deg = — oo                                                                                                •.




                                                                                                                                                                                 Since the leading coefficient bm of g is a unit, Theorem 6.1 implies
(—oo) < n and (— °°) + /? = — 00 =/! + (— oo) for every integer n; (— °°) +
(   — oo ) = — oo                   >
                                                                                                                                                                                                         deg {q x - q 2)         + deg g = deg                                        - # )# = deg(r - n).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                    2


                                                                                                                                                                                 Since deg(r 2 - n) < max (deg r2              deg n) < deg g, the above equality is true
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,



Theorem 6.1. Let R be a ring and f,g e R[xi,                                                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                             x n ].                                              only         if   deg(tf!   - q ) = (-<») = deg(r - n). In other words
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                       - q = and     2                                                   2

                                                                                                                                                                                 r2        - r, = 0.
         (i)        deg{f          + g) < max {deg deg g).                              f,

       (ii)         deg{fg) < deg f         + deg g.
       (iii)        //R has no zero divisors, deg{fg) = deg f + deg g.                                                                                                           Corollary 6.3. {Remainder Theorem) Let R be a ring with identity and
       (iv)         //n = 1 art*/ the leading coefficient off or g is not a zero divisor in R {in par-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
ticular, if it is a unit), then deg{fg)                                                      = deg f + deg g.                                                                                                                               f(x)            = Z) ai^eRW.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2=0
                                                                                                                                                                           yy
       REMARK. The theorem is also true if deg /is taken to mean "degree of /in x k                                                                                    .

                                                                                                                                                                                 For any c £ R there exists a unique q(x) £ R[x] such that f(x) = q(x)(x - c) + f(c).

   SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.1. Since we shall apply this theorem primarily                                                                                                                     PROOF. If /=                 let q   = 0. Suppose then that /^ 0. Theorem 6.2 implies that
when n = 1 we shall prove only that case, (i) is easy (ii) is trivial if / = or g = 0. If
         n                                      m                                                                                                                                there exist unique polynomials q{x), r{x) in R[x] such that/(x) = q{x){x                                                                   - c) + r{x)
  ^ / = 22 &i xi has degree n and ^ g =            °< xi has degree m, then fg = a b                        ^                                                                    and deg r{x) < deg {x — c) - 1 Thus r{x) = r is a constant polynomial (possibly 0).
                                                                                                                                                                                           ™-l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n-l
                                          -
H               h {a n -ibm an bm -i)x n+m 1+   a n b m x m + n has degree at most           +                                                             m + n. Since          If </(*)         = X)             then /(x) = q{x){x - c)                                   + r = -boC +                            {-bkc + bk ^)x k +
a n 7*              ^
                    bm fg has degree
                               ,
                                                                            m
                                          -f n if one of tf n ,&m is not a zero divisor.
                                                                                                                                                                                 b n _ix n -\- r, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n-l
Theorem 6.2. {The Division Algorithm) Let R be a ring with identity and f,g £ R[x]                                                                                                                     f{c) =          -boC +                   i-bkc + ^-i)c                          fc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + b ^c n + r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k = i
nonzero polynomials such that the leading coefficient ofg is a unit in R. Then there exist                                                                                                                              n—l                                  n
unique polynomials q,r s R[x] such that                                                                                                                                                                       =        -S b c + +   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b k -ic k    +r=               +r=
                                                                    f   = Qg + r                 and       deg r < deg g.

                                                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                 Corollary 6.4. //F /j «/WJ, rA^/i //z^ polynomial ring F[x] « a Euclidean domain,
       PROOF. If deg g > deg/ let q = Oandr = /.Ifdegg < deg/ then /=
          m
                                                                                                                                                                 £
                                                                                                                                                                 i =
                                                                                                                                                                                 whence F[x] is a principal ideal domain and a unique factorization domain. The units in
                                                                                                                                                                                 F[x] are precisely the nonzero constant polynomials.
? =      22                        witn «n 7* 0, Z?m ^ 0,                                    m < n, and 6m a unit in                                 Proceed by induction
        i   =
                                                                                                                                                                       ~l
on n = deg flfn = 0, then w = 0, / = a g = b and b is a unit. Let <y = a b                             ,                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. F[x] is an integral domain by Theorem 5.1. Define
and r = 0; then deg r < deg # and qg + r = {aobo" )^ = a = /                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                 V?    :      - (0) -> N by ^(/) - deg /. Since every nonzero element of F is a unit,
                                                                                                                                                                                           F[x]
                                                                                                                                                                                 Theorems 6.1(iv) and 6.2 imply that F[x] is a Euclidean domain. Therefore, F[x] is a
       Assume that the existence part of the theorem is true for polynomials of degree                                                                                           principal ideal domain and a unique factorization domain (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3.9). Finally
less     than n = deg /. A straightforward calculation shows that the polynomial                                                                                                 Theorem 6.1 (iv) implies that every unit /in F[x] has degree zero, whence /is a non-
             ~m
{a n bm~ l x n  )g has degree az and leading coefficient a n Hence                                                                   .                                           zero constant. The converse is obvious.
160                                                                                                 CHAPTER III                   RINGS                                                                                                    6.     FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                       161


          If      F is a field, then F[x u                                                  .   .   .       xn   ]   is not a principal ideal    domain (Exercise 1), but
      unique factorization domain (Theorem 6.14 below). Before proving this latter
it is a
                                                                                                        ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. f(u) =                                implies that a dn =                c(^ (- adc^d^ and
fact we shall discuss factors of degree one in polynomial rings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -a n c n = (j^^d^-^jd. Consequently, if (c,d) =                                    1   R then c    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a   and J| a n by
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Exercise 3.10.
Definition 6.5. Let R be a subring of a commutative ring S, Ci,c 2                                                                                            ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                          cn e S        and
                  m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXAMPLE. If/= ^ 4 - 2^ - 7^ - (ll/3)x - 4/3 £ QW, then /has the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3         2
/= ]C a x \                    *
                                           il '                    '
                                                                       x n in £ R( x i> •••»*„] a polynomial such                                that     f(ci,c 2 ,                          cn)       = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Q as does 3f= 3x - 6* - 21x 2 - 11* - 4 £ Z[x]. By Proposition 6.8
                                                           '                                                                                                                  .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4         3
          i       =                                                                                                                                                                                            roots in
Then (ci,c 2                       ,       .       .       .
                                                                   ,
                                                                           c n ) is said to be a root or zero off (or a solution of the polynomial                                                             the only possible rational roots of 3/are dbl, ±2, ±4, ±1/3, ±2/3 and ±4/3. Sub-
equation f(x u                                         .       .       .
                                                                            ,
                                                                                x n ) = 0). 4                                                                                                                  stitution shows that 4 is the only rational root.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Let D be an integral domain and fe D[x]. If c e D and c is a root of / then re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               peated application of Theorem 6.6 together with Theorem 6.7 shows that there is a
Theorem 6.6. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and f £ R[x]. Then c £ R is a                                                                                                                           greatest integer         m (0 < m < deg /) such that
root off if and only ifx — c divides                                                                                 f.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /(*) = (x - crg(x),

   SKETCH OF PROOF. We have /(*) = q(x)(x - c) + f(c) by Corollary                                                                                                                                             where #(*) £ R[x] and * - cJfg(x) (that is, g(c) ^ 0). The integer m is called the
6.3. If x - c f(x), then h(x)(x - c) = f(x) = q(x)(x - c) + /(c) with h e R[x],
                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                               multiplicity of the root c of          / If c has multiplicity             1 ,   c is said to be a simple root. If c
whence (h(x) — q(x))(x — c) = /(c). Since R is commutative, Corollary 5.6 (with                                                                                                                                has multiplicity        m>       1 , c is called     a multiple root. In order to determine when a poly-

<P
  => 1r) implies /(c) = (/z(c) — q(c))(c — c) = 0. Commutativity is not required for                                                                                                                           nomial has multiple roots we need:
the converse; use Corollary 6.3.




Theorem 6.7. //D is an integral domain contained in an integral domain E and
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lemma 6.9. Let D be an integral domain andf =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aiX £ D[x]. Let f £ D[x] be the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1




f £ D[x] has degree n, then f has at most n distinct roots in E.                                                                                                                                               polynomial         f'   = ]T) ka k x k - = ai + 2a x + 3a x 2 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2       3                     h nanX""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .   Then for   all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k= i
                                                                                                                                                                                                               f,g £ D[x] andc e D:
    SKETCH OF PROOF. Let Ci,c ... be the distinct roots of /in E. By Theorem                                         2,

6.6 f(x) = q\(x)(x — ci), whence = /(c ) =       )(c — ci) by Corollary 5.6. Since                                        2       <:/i(c 2   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (i)   (cf)'   = cf;
ci ?± c and E is an integral domain, qi(c ) = 0. Therefore, x — c divides # and
                      2                                                                                                       2                               2                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (ii)   (f   +g)' = f + g';
f(x) = ^CkX* — c )(jc — ci). An inductive argument now shows that whenever      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (iii)   (fg)'   = f'g + fg';
ci,   . Cm are distinct roots of / in E, then gm = (x — ci)(x — c )-     (x — cv,)                                                                                                    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (iv) (g n )'   = ng^g'.
              .   .       ,                                                                                                                                           2

divides /. But deg gm = m by Theorem 6.1. Therefore m < n by Theorem 6.1
again.                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROOF. Exercise.

          REMARK. Theorem 6.7 may be false without the hypothesis of commutativity.                                                                                                                               The polynomial /' is called the formal derivative off. The word "formal" em-
For example, x 2 + 1 has an infinite number of distinct roofs in the division ring of                                                                                                                          phasizes the fact that the definition of /' does not involve the concept of limits.

real quaternions (including ±z, ±y and ±k).                                                                                                                                                                       According to Definition 3.3 a nonzero polynomial feR[x] is irreducible pro-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               vided /is not a unit and in every factorization / = gh, either g or h is a unit in R[x].

          If      D is a unique factorization domain with quotient field F and fe D[x], then the
roots of /in F may be found via
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 6.10. Let D be an integral domain which is a subring of an integral domain
                                                                                                                                                                                                               E. Let f £ D[x] andc e E.

Proposition 6.8. Let D be a unique factorization domain with quotient field F and let                                                                                                                               (i)   c is a multiple root off if and only //f(c)= andf'(c) = 0.
                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (ii)  //D is afield and f is relatively prime to f, then f has no multiple roots in E.
f    =
          i
              2
              =
                              aiX      *
                                               £       D M- If u== c /d £ F with c and d relatively prime, and u is a root off,                                                                                    (iii) //D is afield, f is irreducible in D[x] and E contains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a root off, then f has no
then c divides a                                                           tf/fd d   divides a n            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                               multiple roots in E if and only iff'^0.


   4
     Commutativity is not essential in the definition provided one distinguishes "left roots"                                                                                                                     PROOF, (i) f(x) = (x - c)mg(x) where m is the multiplicity of f(m > 0) and
and "right roots" (the latter occur when /is written / = 23              n
                                                                      *n a<)-                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lemma 6.9 f(x) = m(x - c) m ~ g(x) + (x - c) mg'(x). If c is a multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                               g(c) 9* 0. By                                                      l
162                                       CHAPTER III                     RINGS                                                                    6.        FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                                                                              163


root of/, then m > 1, whence f'(c) = 0. Conversely, if f(c) = 0, then m > 1 (Theo-                            PROOF.                 /=
                                                                                                                            C(f)f and g = C(g)gi with fu gi primitive. Consequently,
rem 6.6). If m = 1, then /'(*) =      + (x - c)g\x). Consequently, if f'(c) = 0,                           C(fg) = C(C(f)fiC(g)gi) - C(/)C(g)C(/lgl ). Hence it suffices to prove that flgl is
then      = f'(c) = g(c) by Corollary 5.6, which is a contradiction. Therefore, m > 1.                                                                                                                                        n                                                 m
      (ii)By Corollary 6.4 and Theorem 3.1 1 kf+ hf = 1 d for some           e D[x] C £[*].           M    primitive (that
                                                                                                                m+n
                                                                                                                                             is,       C(/gi)
                                                                                                                                                                          _^
                                                                                                                                                                              is    a unit).                If     / =    ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cnx*                   and   gi       =   ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y*=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bjX>,          then

If c is a multiple root of /, then by Corollary 5.6 and (i) \ D = k{c)f{c) + h(c)f\c) = 0,
                                                                                                          /i#i = ]C ^a** witn c * =                                       ]C                          If         is not   primitive, then there exists an irre-
which is a contradiction. Hence c is simple root.                                                                   k=                                                i+j = k
   (iii) If /is irreducible and /' ^ 0, then /and /' are relatively prime since deg/' <
                                                                                                           ducible element p in R such that p                                             \
                                                                                                                                                                                                  c k for all k. Since C(/) is a unit p\ C(/), whence

deg / Therefore, /has no multiple roots in E by (ii). Conversely, suppose /has no                          there is a least integer 5 such that

multiple roots in E and 6 is a root of /in E. If /' = 0, then b is a multiple root by (i),
                                                                                                                                                                      p       tfi    for               /   < s      and           pJfa s        .


which is a contradiction. Hence /' ^ 0.
                                                                                                                                                                          I




                                                                                                           Similarly there is a least integer / such that

   This completes the discussion of linear factors of polynomials. We now consider
                                                                                                                                                                      p       bj     for               y   <   /   and            pJfb        t .

the more general question of determining the units and irreducible elements in the
                                                                                                                                                                          I




polynomial ring D[x], where D is an integral domain. In general this is quite difficult,                  Since     p           divides        c s+t = a b s+t H                                       h a s ^b t+ i   + aA +                           tf s+ i6<_i   H       h « s+ ^ /?              ,


but certain facts are easily established:                                                                 must divide a s b Since every irreducible element in D is prime,/?
                                                                                                                                       t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a s or p b This is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \    t .


      (i)    The units in D[x] are precisely the constant polynomials that are units in D                 a contradiction. Therefore /gi is primitive.
[see the proof of Corollary 6.4].
      (ii)    lie zD and c is irreducible in Z>, then the constant polynomial c is irreducible
in D[x] [use Theorem 6.1             and (i)].
                                                                                                          Lemma 6.12. Let D be a unique factorization domain with quotient field F and let f
        Every first degree polynomial whose leading coefficient is a unit in D is irre-
      (iii)
                                                                                                          and g be primitive polynomials in D[x]. Then f aw/ g are associates in D[x] //««^/ only if
ducible in D[x]. In particular, every first degree polynomial over a field is irreducible.
                                                                                                          they are associates in F[x],
       Suppose D is a subring of an integral domain E and / e D[x]
      (iv)                                                                E[x]. Then /                C
may be irreducible in E[x] but not in D[x] and vice versa, as is seen in the following
                                                                                                               PROOF. If /and g are associates in the integral domain F[x], then / = gu for
examples.
                                                                                                          some unit u e F[x] (Theorem 3.2 (vi)). By Corollary 6.4 w e F, whence w = b/c with
                                                                                                          Z?,c e Z) and c ^ 0. Therefore, c/ =    Since C(/) and C(g) are units in D,
      EXAMPLES. 2x + 2 is irreducible in Q[x] by (iii) above. However, 2x + 2
= 2(x + 1) and neither 2 nor x + 1 is a unit in Z[x] by(i), whence 2x + 2 is re-                                                                   c        - cC(/) - C(cf) = C(bg) - Z>C(g) - b.
ducible in Z[x]. x 2     +    1 is   irreducible over the real field, but factors over the complex
field as (x      + i)(x —    /).   Since x   +   /   and x — i are not units in C[x] by (i), x 2 + 1 is   Therefore, b = cv for some unit v e    D and cf = bg = vcg. Consequently, f = vg
reducible in C[x].                                                                                        (since c    ^ 0), whence / and g are associates in Z>[x]. The converse is trivial.
      In order to obtain what few general results there are in this area the rest of the
discussion will be restricted to polynomials over a unique factorization domain D.
We shall eventually prove that D[x u    x n is also a unique factorization domain.
                                                      .   .   .
                                                                  ,   ]                                   Lemma 6.13. Let D be a unique factorization domain with quotient field F and f a
The proof requires some preliminaries, which will also provide a criterion for irre-                      primitive polynomial ofpositive degree in D[x]. Then f is irreducible in D[x] // and only
ducibility in D[x].                                                                                       iff is irreducible in F[x].
                                                                                  n
    Let D be a unique factorization domain and / = ]C Qixi a nonzero polynomial in
                                                     i =                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose / is irreducible in D[x] and / = gh with
D[x]. A greatest common divisor of the coefficients a ,ai,   a n is called a content of
                                                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n                                                      m
/and is denoted C(/). Strictly speaking, the notation C(/) is ambiguous since great-                      g,h e F[x] and deg g >                             1,       deg h > 1. Then g =                                ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a i/bl)x i and /z                       =    ^ (cj/d^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                j=0
estcommon divisors are not unique. But any two contents of /are necessarily associ-                                                          D and ^ ^ 0, ^ ^ 0. Let
                                                                                                          with aub^c^dj e                                                                                                 = W>i-                    •   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^ and for each                         /       let
ates and any associate of a content of / is also a content of /. We shall write b ~ c                                                                                                             n
whenever b and c are associates in D. Now = is an equivalence relation on D and                           b* = bQb      Y   -   •
                                                                                                                                    -bt-ibi+i-          •    b n If gi =
                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                              ^=                   £ D[x],         then                      = ag with a = C(gi),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2

since D is an integral domain, b ~ c if and only if b = cu for some unit u e D by
                                                                                                                                                                                              i



Theorem 3.2 (vi). If a e D and /e D[x], then C{af) == aC(/) (Exercise 4). If /e £>M
                                                                                                          g2 £   DMand ^ 2 primitive. Verify that g = (\ D /b)g, = (a/b)g 2 and deg g = deg g 2                                                                                                              .



                                                                                                          Similarly h = (c/d)h 2 with c,deD, h 2 e D[x], h 2 primitive and deg h = deg h 2 Con-
and C(/) is a unit in D, then / is said to be primitive. Clearly for any polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .



                                                                                                          sequently,/ = gh = (a/b)(c/d)g2 h 2 whence                                  ,                        W/= «cg             2 /7 2 .     Since /is primitive by hy-
g e D[x], g = C(g)gi with gi primitive.                                                                   pothesis and g 2 h 2 is primitive by Lemma 6.11,

                                                                                                                                     bd - WC(/) - Cibdf) = C(acg 2 h 2 ) - acC(g2h 2 ) - ac.
Lemma 6-11- (Gauss) If D zj a Hwgwe factorization domain and f,geD[x], then
C(fg) = C(f)C(g). In particular, the product of primitive polynomials is primitive.                       As in the proof of Lemma 6.12, bd and ac associates in D imply that /and g2//2 are
164                                                                         CHAPTER III                               RINGS                                                                                                                                                              6.       FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                                              165


associates in D[x]. Consequently, / is reducible in D[x], which                                                                                                                            is           a contradiction.                            then f is irreducible in F[x]. Iff is primitive, then f is irreducible in D[x].
Therefore, /is irreducible in F[x].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF. /= C(/)Z with / primitive in D[x] and C(f) e D; (in particular / = /
    Conversely if /is irreducible in F[x] and / = gh with g,h s /)[*], then one of g,h                                                                                                                                                             if /is primitive). SinceC(/) is a unit in F (Corollary 6.4), it suffices to show that / is
(say g) is a constant by Corollary 6.4. Thus C(/) = gC(/i). Since / is primitive, g                                                                                                                                                                irreducible in F[x]. By Lemma 6.13 we need only prove that / is irreducible in D[x].
must be a unit in £> and hence in D[x]. Therefore, /is irreducible in D[x].                                                                                                                                                                        Suppose on the contrary that / = gh with

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g = br x r H                  f-   b   e D[x],               deg g = r > 1                   ;    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h = csx 5 H                                                  deg /* = s > 1.
Theorem 6.14. //D zs                                              unique factorization domain, then so is the polynomial ring                                                                                                                                                                                       h Co £

D[xi,    .   .       .
                             ,
                                 x„].                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Now        /?   does not divide C(f) (since /?^« n ), whence the coefficients of / =                                                                     a,** 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t   =
       REMARK. Since a field F is trivially a unique factorization domain, F[xi                                                                                                                                       ,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xn   ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   satisfy the same divisibility conditions with respect to p as do the coefficients of
is    a unique factorization domain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Since p divides a * = b c and every irreducible in                      D is prime, either p b or p c                                        \            \    ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   say p      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b   .   Since /7 2   /f a *, c is «o/ divisible by p. Now some coefficient   of g is not
    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.14. We                  prove only that D[x] is a unique                             shall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   divisible by p (otherwise /; would divide every coefficient of gh                                                                      = /, which would
factorization domain. Since D[x u ...,*„] = Z)[*i,     x n -i][x n by Corollary 5.7, a                                                        .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                  ,                    ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   be a contradiction). Let k be the least integer such that
routine inductive argument then completes the proof. If fe D[x] has positive degree,
then / = C(/) / with / a primitive polynomial in D[x] of positive degree. Since D is a                                                                                                                                                                                                             p   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bi       for      /       < k            and                z?/)^.
unique factorization domain, either C(f) is a unit or C(f) = dc 2     c m with each c                                                                                                       -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Then 1 < k < r < n. Since a k * = bock +
irreducible in D and hence in D[x]. Let F be the quotient field of D. Since F[x] is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H       h b k ^Ci       and /?     /? +              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   must divide b k c whence p divides bk or c                                                  Since this is a contradiction, / must be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -p n *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,

unique factorization domain (Corollary 6.4) which contains D[x],f =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .


                                                                                                                                                                                                            pi*p 2 *-             •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   irreducible in D[x].                       m
with each p x * an irreducible polynomial in F[x]. The proof of Lemma 6.13 shows that
for each /, Pi * = {a i /bl)p i with a u bi e D, h 5* 0, ajbi e F, Pi e D[x] and Pi primitive.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EXAMPLE. If         2x 5 - 6x*    /=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9x 2 - 15 £ Z[x] then the Eisenstein Criterion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +
Clearly each p { is irreducible in F[x], whence each p { is irreducible in D[x] by Lemma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   with p = 3 shows that /is irreducible in both Q[x] and Z[x].
6.13. If a = a x a 2  -a n and b = b b r -bn then / = (a/b)pip 2
                                          -    •                       -p n Consequently,
                                                                              x
                                                                                                •
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                   -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .




bf = apipr                         •
                                       -Pn- Since         / and p\p           2 -
                                                                                        •
                                                                                                7?n are primitive (Lemma 6.11), it follows (as in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EXAMPLE. Let/= y* + x y + x y + x e R[x,y] with R a unique factorization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2   2            z

the proof of Lemma 6.12) that a and b are associates in D. Thus a/b = w with w a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   domain. Then x is irreducible in R[x] and / considered as an element of CKM)[y] is
unit in Z). Therefore, if C(/) is a nonunit, / = C(/)/ = cic 2 -Cmiup^Pr -Pn with                                                                                          -       •                              •




each c t ,/?i, and                                 irreducible in D[x]. Similarly, if C(/) is a unit, /is a product of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   primitive. Therefore,                      / is irreducible in /?[*][>>] = R[x y]                                           9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       by Theorem 6.14 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eisenstein's Criterion (with p                     = x and D = R[x]).
irreducible elements in D[x].

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      For another application of Eisenstein's Criterion see Exercise 10. There is a
   (Uniqueness) Suppose /is a nonprimitive polynomial in D[x] of positive degree.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lengthy method, due to Kronecker, for finding all the irreducible factors of a poly-
Verify that any factorization of /as a product of irreducible elements may be written
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nomial over a unique factorization domain, which has only a finite number of units,
/= dc 2 'C m pv -p n with each a irreducible in £>, C(f) = cv c m and each /?» irre-
                 -       •                •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   such as Z (Exercise 13). Other examples and techniques appear in Exercises 6-9.
ducible (and hence primitive) in D[x] of positive degree. Suppose                                                                                                                          /= <4-             •   -fi^r               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q*

with each ^ irreducible in D, C(f) ^ di                                                                       >
                                                                                                                  d and each ^ irreducible primitive in
                                                                                                                      r


D[x] of positive degree. Then cic 2                                                 -       •
                                                                                                 c n and </i</2                       -   •       -
                                                                                                                                                      A are associates in D. Unique                                                                                                                                 EXERCISES
factorization in                         D implies that n = r, and (after reindexing) each a is an associate of
di.Consequently, pipr -p n and                q s are associates in Z)[x] and hence in F[x].
                                                          •                                         •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.   (a) If            D is an integral domain and c is an irreducible element in Z), then D[x] is
Since each p { [resp. cy,] is irreducible in F[x] by Lemma 6.13, unique factorization in                                                                                                                                                                 not a principal ideal domain. [Hint: consider the ideal (x,c) generated by x and c]

F[x] (Corollary 6.4) implies that n = s and (after reindexing) each p is an associate of                                                                                                        x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) Z[x] is not a principal ideal domain.

qi in F[x].                      By Lemma 6.12 each p is an associate of q in D[x].
                                                                              {                                                                               x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (c)       If      F is a field and n > 2, then F[x u                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           xn      ]   is not a    principal ideal domain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [Hint: show that Xi is irreducible in F[x u                                               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x n _i].]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.   If   F is a field and fg e F[x] with deg g > 1, then there exist unique polynomials
Theorem 6.15. {Eisensteins Criterion). Let D be a unique factorization domain with                                                                                                                                                                       foju -..,/£ F[x] such that deg / < deg g for all / and
                                                              n
quotient field F. Iff =                                                     e Dfx], deg f                         >                                       p «             irreducible element o/D
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f=fo + fig + f*>+'- + frir.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.    Let /be a polynomial of positive degree over an integral domain D.
                                              p^a n   ;
                                                                  p|a   s    for                 i      = 0,1,        .       .   .       ,   n - 1                   ;   p ^a
                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                                                             (a) If char             D = 0, then /' ^ 0.
                                                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




166                                                                                     CHAPTER III                                      RINGS                                                                                                                              6.          FACTORIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL RINGS                                                     167



               (b) If char                 D = p ^ 0, then /' =                                                               if    and only if /is a polynomial in x p (that                                                                         ments of D, then /is completely determined by /(c ),/(ci),     ,f(cn ) according                      .   .   .




      is,      /=     tf          +       tfp* p       +           tf2 P   *       2p
                                                                                         H                       hfl;p^
                                                                                                                              ,,p
                                                                                                                                    ).                                                                                                                              Here is Kronecker's Method for finding all the irreducible factors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to Exercise 1 1   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of /in D[x].
 4. If Z) is a unique factorization domain, a e                                                                                          D and /e D[x], then C(a/) and arC(/)                                                                             (a) It suffices to find only those factors g of degree at most n/2.
      are associates in D.
                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) If g is a factor of / then g(c) is a factor of f(c) for all c e D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (c)   Let m be the largest integer <n/2 and choose distinct elements c ,ci,
 5.   Let R be a commutative ring with identity and / =                                                                                                                                       a ^ xi £ ^M- Then /is a
                                                                                                                                                                                  i =                                                                cm e £>. Choose */ ,^i,              .       .       .       ,dm e D such that </< is a factor of /(c») in Z) for all /. Use
      unit in R[x] if and only if an is a unit in R and ai,                                                                                          .    .       .       ,       a n are nilpotent elements of                                      Exercise 12 to construct a polynomial g s F[x] such that g(d) = </, for all /; it is
      R (Exercise 1.12).                                                                                                                                                                                                                             unique by Exercise 1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d) Check to see if the polynomial g of part (c) is a factor of /in F[x]. If not,
 6.    [Probably impossible with the tools at hand.] Let p e Z be a prime; let F be a field
                               - c is irreducible in F[jc] if and only if x - c has no root
                                                                   p                                                                                                                                          p                                      make a new choice of do, ... dm and repeat part (c). (Since D is a unique fac-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
       and let c € F. Then x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     torization domain with only finitely many units there are only a finite number of
       in F. [Hint: consider two cases: char F — p and char F ^ p.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     possible choices for d       dm .) If g is a factor of / say / = gh, then repeat the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



 7.   If       / = ]T                       e Z[x] and p is                                    prime, let / =
                                                                                                                                         —
                                                                                                                                           ^     aiX { e                      ZP M, where 5 is the image                                             entire process on g and h.

      of a under the canonical epimorphism Z > Zp                                                                                                .                                                                                                     (e) After a finite number of steps, all the (irreducible) factors of /in F[x] will

        (a) If /is monic and /is irreducible inZP for sdme prime p, then /is irre-                                                           M                                                                                                       have been found. If g e F[x] is such a factor (of positive degree) then choose r e D
      ducible in Z[x].                                                                                                                                                                                                                               such that rg e D[x] (for example, let r be the product of the denominators of the
               (b)   Give an example to show that (a) may be false if /is not monic.                                                                                                                                                                 coefficients of g). Then r~ l {rg) and hence rg is a factor of /. Then rg = C(rg)gi
               (c)   Extend (a) to polynomials over a unique factorization domain.                                                                                                                                                                   with gi s D[x] primitive and irreducible in F[x]. By Lemma 6.13, gi is an irre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ducible factor of /in D[x]. Proceed in this manner to obtain all the nonconstant
 8.   [Probably impossible with the tools at hand.] (a) Let c e F, where F is a field of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     irreducible factors of /; the constants are then easily found.
      characteristic p (p prime).                                                       Then x p — x - c is irreducible in F[x] if and only if
      x— x - c has no root in F.
           p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              14.    Let R be a commutative ring with identity and c,b e R with c a unit.
              F = 0, part (a) is false.
      (b) If char                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (a)   Show that the assignment x H cx + b induces a unique automorphism of
 9. Let / = 5j diX e Z[x] have degree n. Suppose that for some k (0 < k < n) and
                                                  {                                                                                                                                                                                                  R[x] that is the identity of R. What is its inverse?
                          t-0                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b) If   D is an integral domain, then show that every automorphism of D[x]
      some prime p p\a n p\                   :
                                                                   \                    k\   p       \
                                                                                                         a* for all                      <   /   < k —                                1 ;     and p 2 J{ao. Show that /                              that is the identity on    D is of the type described in (a).
      has a factor g of degree at least k that is irreducible in Z[x].
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n                               15. If      F is a field, then x and y are relatively prime in the polynomial domain F[x,y],
10. (a)         Let        D be an integral domain and c e £>. Let /(*) = 22 fl;*' e Z)[x] and                                                                                                                                                       but F[x,y] = (l F ) Z> (jc)                              + Cv) [compare Theorem 3.11           (i)].
                                          n                                                                                                                                                               i   =
      /(a:       — c) = 22 a (* — c)* e />[*]. Then f(x) is irreducible in />[*] if and only if
                                                       t

                                          i=0                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 6.   Let / = a n x n   +    •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        + a be a polynomial over the field R of real numbers and let
      f(x — c) is irreducible.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <p = \an \x» + -- + \a eR[*].            \




      (b) For each prime p, the cyclotomic polynomial / = x p
                                                              ~                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                                                              + xp~ H             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              h x     +   1             (a) If \u\   ^d, then \f{u)\ ^ <p(d). [Recall that \a + b\ ^ \a\ + \b\ and
      is        irreducible                       in           Z[x].                [Hint:                       observe                 that        / = (x p — \)/{x — 1), whence                                                                   that \a\ ^ a', \b\ ^ b' ^> \ab\ ^a'b'.]

      f(x + 1) = ((x + \y — \)/x. Use the Binomial Theorem 1.6 and Eisenstein's                                                                                                                                                                         (b) Given a,c e R with c >    there exists M e R such that /(a + /*) - /(«)| <                  |




      Criterion to show that f(x + 1) is irreducible in Z[x].]                                                                                                                                                                                       M|/*| for all h e R with |A| < c. [///«/: use part (a).]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c) (Intermediate Value Theorem) If a < b and f(a) < d < f(b), then there
11.   If co, c\   c„ are distinct elements of an integral domain D and do,
                      ,   .   .                                                dn are                                                                                                                                 .   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     exists c s R such that a < c < b and /(<?) =
                                  .   ,                                                                                                                                                                                       .   ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [///«/: Let c be the least upper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        </.
      any elements of D, then there is at most one polynomial / of degree < n in D[x]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bound of S = {x a < x < b and f(x) < d) Use part (b).]
      such that f(ci) = d for = 0, 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \                                                    .

                                                           x
                                                               ^
                                                                               /                         .   .
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                     ,   n.   [For the existence of /, see Exercise 12].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (d)   Every polynomial g of odd degree in R[x] has a real root. [Hint: for suit-
12.   Lagrange's Interpolation Formula. If F is a field, a ,a u                                                                                                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   a n are distinct ele-                      able a,b £ R, #(tf)            <         and g(b) > 0; use part (c).]
      ments of F and c ,ci,                                            .   .   .    ,   c„ are any elements of F, then

                                                      (•* ~    '••(•* ~ a i-0( x -                                                                                                        (x - an )
                                      x
                                                      V                            t+i) flo)                                                         fl                       •       •




                                                                                                                                                                                            to - a n )
                                                  £q (ai — a )- -fa - a<_i)(a/ - tfi+i)-         •




      is   the unique polynomial of degree < n in F[x] such that f{ai) = Ci for all / [see
      Exercise 11].

13.   Let D be a unique factorization domain with a finite number of units and
      quotient field F. If /e D[x] has degree n and c ,ci, c n are n 1 distinct ele-                                                                          .       .       .   ,                               +
                                                                                                                                1.     MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND .EXACT SEQUENCES                           169



                                                                                              1.     MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES
                                                                                                 Modules over a ring are a generalization of abelian groups (which are modules
                                                                                              over Z). Consequently, the first part of this section is primarily concerned with
                                                                                              carrying over to modules various concepts and results of group theory.                                    The re-
                                                                                              mainder of the section presents the basic facts about exact sequences.

                               CHAPTER |V
                                                                                             Definition 1.1. Let R be a ring. A {left) R-module is an additive abelian group A to-

                             MODULES                                                         gether with a function
                                                                                             for all r,s e R and a,b e A:
                                                                                                                                                RXA-^A {the image of (r,a) being denoted by ra) such that

                                                                                                        (i)         r(a      + b) = ra + rb.
                                                                                                     (ii)           (r      + s)a = ra + sa.
                                                                                                   (iii)            r(sa)            = (rs)a.
                                                                                             IfR has an identity element 1r and
                                                                                                   (iv)             l   R a = a for all a s A,
                                                                                             then    A is said to be a unitary R-module. IfR is a division ring, then a unitary R-module
                                                                                             is called a (left)                        vector space.


Modules over a ring are a generalization of abelian groups (which are modules over              A (unitary) right /^-module is defined similarly via a function A X R A de-                            —
Z). They are basic in the further study of algebra. Section     1   is   mostly devoted to   noted (a,r) |— » ar and satisfying the obvious analogues of (i)-(iv). From now on, un-
carrying over to modules various concepts and results of group theory. Although the          less specified                          otherwise, "/^-module" means "left fl-module" and it is understood
classification (up to isomorphism) of modules over an arbitrary ring is quite difficult,     that all theorems about                               left   /^-modules also hold, mutatis mutandis, for right R-
we do have substantially complete results for free modules over a ring (Section 2) and       modules.
finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain (Section 6). Free modules, of             A given group A may have many different i?-module structures (both left and
which vector spaces over a division ring are a special case, have widespread applica-        right). If             R is commutative, it is easy to verify that every left /^-module A can be given
tions and are studied thoroughly in Section 2. Projective modules (a generalization of       the structure of a right /^-module by defining ar = ra for r e R, a s A (commutativity
free modules) are considered in Section 3; this material is needed only in Section           isneeded for (iii); for a generalization of this idea to arbitrary rings, see Exercise 16).
VIII.6 and Chapter IX.                                                                       Unless specified otherwise, every module A over a commutative ring R is assumed to
   With the exception of Sections 2 and 6, we shall concentrate on external struc-           be both a left and a right module with ar = ra for all r e R, a s A.
tures involving modules rather than on the internal structure of modules. Of particu-              If       A is a module with additive identity element              A over a ring R with additive
lar interest are certain categorical aspects of the theory of modules: exact sequences       identity                   R then it is easy to show that for all r e R, a e A:
                                                                                                                            ,



(Section 1) and module homomorphisms (Section 4). In addition we shall study vari-
ous constructions involving modules such as the tensor product (Section 5). Algebras                                                                  rO A   =   A   and   Ra =     A   .




over a commutative ring K with identity are introduced in Section 7.
                                                                                             In the sequel                           A ,0 R ,0 s Z and the trivial module {0} will all be denoted 0.
   The approximate interdependence of the sections of this chapter is as follows:
                                                                                                   It also is easy to verify that for all r e R, n s                         Z and a e A       :




                                            1
                                                                                                                                         (   — r)a = —(ra) = r( — a)       and    n(ra)     = r(na),

                                                                                             where na has its usual meaning for groups (Definition 1.1.8, additive notation).


                                                                                                EXAMPLE. Every additive abelian group                                            G is a unitary Z-module, with
                                                                                             na (n e Z,<z e G) given by Definition 1.1.8.
                                                        \
                                                        7
                                                                                                   EXAMPLE. If 5 is a ring and R is a subring, then 5 is an .R-module (but not
A broken arrow A — B indicates that an occasional result from Section A is used              vice versa!) with ra (reR,asS) being multiplication in S. In particular, the rings

in Section B, but that Section   B is essentially independent of Section A.                  R[x u      .   .   .
                                                                                                                        ,   xm and R[[x\] are /^-modules.
                                                                                                                                ]




                                           168
                                                                                              }                                                                                                                                                              .                   .                .




170                                     CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                1.       MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES                                                                                                                                     171


      EXAMPLES. If / is a left ideal of a ring R, then / is a left ^-module with                                          Definition 1.3. Let R be a ring, A an R-module andB a nonempty subset of A. B is a
                                                            and R are ^-modules.
ra (r e R,a £ I) being the ordinary product in R. In particular,                                                          submodule of A provided that B is an additive subgroup of A and rb e B for all r e R,
Furthermore, since / is an additive subgroup of R, R/I is an (abelian) group. R/ 1 is                                     b £ B. A submodule of a vector space over a division ring is called a subspace.
an /^-module with r(n + /) = rn + /. R/I need not be a ring, however, unless / is a
two-sided ideal.                                                                                                             Note that a submodule is itself a module. Also a submodule of a unitary module
                                                                                                                          over a ring with identity is necessarily unitary.

      EXAMPLE. Let R and S be rings and p R ^ S         :             a.   ring homomorphism. Then
every 5-moduIe A can be made into an     -module by defining rx (x e A) to be <p(r)x.                                        EXAMPLES. If R is a ring and /: A — B is an .R-module homomorphism, then                                  >



One says that the .K-module structure of A is given by pullback along <p.                                                 Ker /is a submodule of A and Im /is a submodule of B. If C is any submodule of B,
                                                                                                                          then f~\C) = {aeA\ f(a) s C) is a submodule of A.

      EXAMPLE. Let A be an abelian group and End A its endomorphism ring (see                                                 EXAMPLE. Let / be a left ideal of the ring R, A an .R-module and S a nonempty
p. 116). Then        A is a unitary (End A)-modu\e, with fa defined to be f(a) (for as A,
/s End A).
                                                                                                                          subset of A. Then IS =                                                        I       n e /; a £ S; « e N*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t                                 is a   submodule of A (Exer-
                                                                                                                                                                                 j       J2
   EXAMPLE. If R is a ring, every abelian group can be made into an /^-module                                             cise 3). Similarly if a s A, then la                                          = {ra              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r e /} is a submodule of /4.

with trivial module structure by defining ra = for all r e R and a £ A.
                                                                                                                              EXAMPLE. If {£                     t       |
                                                                                                                                                                             /   £ /} is a family of submodules of a                                                        module A, then f| £ is                            t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t'e/

                                                                                                                          easily seen to be a submodule of

Definition 1.2. Let A and B be modules over a ring R. A function f                                    :   A — B is an
R-moduIe homomorphism provided that for all a,c s A and r s R:
                                                                                                                          Definition 1.4.              IfX is a subset of a module A over a ring R, then the intersection of
                             f(a   + c) = f(a) + f(c)           f(ra)      = rf(a).                                       all submodules of            A containing X is called the submodule generated by X (or spanned
                                                                                                                          by X).
// R     z'j   « division ring, then an R-module homomorphism                       is       called a linear trans-
formation.
                                                                                                                             If X  finite, and X generates the module B, B is said to be finitely generated. If
                                                                                                                                     is
   When the context is clear 7?-module homomorphisms are called simply homo-                                              X = 0, then X clearly generates the zero module. If X consists of a single element,
morphisms. Observe that an /^-module homomorphism /: A — B is necessarily a                       >
                                                                                                                          X = [a], then the submodule generated by X called the cyclic (sub)module gen-                                        is
homomorphism of additive abelian groups. Consequently the same terminology is                                             erated by a. Finally, if {B {                              \
                                                                                                                                                                                         i   s /} is a family of submodules of A, then the                                                                        submodule
used: /is an R-moduIe monomorphism [resp. epimorphism, isomorphism] if it is in-                                          generated by     X - (J B                  t       is called the                          sum of the modules B                             {.   If the index set / is finite,
jective [resp. surjective, bijective] as a map of sets. The kernel of /is its kernel as a                                                                  iel
                                                                                                                          the sum of B u                       Bn is denoted B + B H                                                                     Bn
homomorphism of abelian groups, namely Ker /= {qeA f(a) = Oj. Similarly                  \
                                                                                                                                               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                           ,                                                    x          2                        (-           .




the image of /is the set Im / = b e B b = f(a) for some a s A
                                           {     \
                                                              Finally, Theorem                    .




1.2.3 implies:
      (i)      /is an 7?-module monomorphism if and only if Ker                      /= 0;                                Theorem 1.5. Let R be a ring, A an R-module, X a subset of A,                                                                                                  {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bi       i       e 1 1   a family
      / A — B is an 7?-module isomorphism if and only if there is an /^-module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |




      (ii)       :   *
                                                                                                                          of submodules of A and a e A. Let Ra = ra r s R
homomorphism g B — A such that gf = 1 A and fg =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {           |             |

                         :                                                 l ri .

                                                                                                                              (0 Ra is a submodule of A and the map R —> Ra given by r |—> ra is an R-module
                                                                                                                          epimorphism.
      EXAMPLES. For any modules the zero map                     :   A — B given by a h»                     {a £ A) is
                                                                                                                                   The cyclic submodule C generated by a is ra + na
                                                                                                                              (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r £   R n s Z IfR has an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;                    }   .

a module homomorphism. Every homomorphism of abelian groups is a Z-module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {                     |




                                                                                                                          identity and C is unitary, then C = Ra.
homomorphism. If R is a ring, the map R[x] — R[x] given by / h */(for example,
                                                            >
                                                                                                                             (iii) The submodule D generated by X is
(x 2 + 1)       H
          *(* 2 +1)) is an /^-module homomorphism, but not a ring homo-
morphism.
                                                                                                                                               |
                                                                                                                                                   S           riai          + ZJ n b M         i   i       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e    N*; ai,bj e X ;n e R; nj e z|

      REMARK. For a given ring R the class of all /?-modules [resp. unitary                                               IfR has an identity and A is unitary, then
/^-modules] and 7^-module homomorphisms clearly forms a (concrete) category. In
fact, one can define epimorphisms and monomorphisms strictly in categorical terms
(objects and morphisms only              — no elements); see Exercise               2.
                                                                                                                                                           D = RX = j^j r                                            iai   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s £ N*; ai e                  X; n e R j
                                                                                                                                                                                                  A                                                                                                          }




172                                               CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                            1.       MODULES, H0M0M0RPH1SMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES                                                                                          173


       (iv)   The sum of the family                {
                                                       B,   |
                                                                    i   e I)   consists of all finite sums b n H   h b in with       Theorem 1.9. Let B and C be submodules of a module A over a ring K.
b ik e B ik   .

                                                                                                                                            There is an K-module isomorphism B/(B fl C)
                                                                                                                                                (i)                                          (B + C)/C;                                  ^
                                                                                                                                            ifC(ii)              d
                                                                                                                                                    B, then B/C is a submodule of A/C, and there is an K-module isomor-
       PROOF. Exercise; note that if R has an identity 1 R and A is unitary, then nl R eR                                            phism (A/C)/(B/C)      A/B.                ^
for all n e           Z and na =       (/* 1   R )a for all a e A.
                                                                                                                                               PROOF. See Corollaries 1.5.9 and 1.5.10.


Theorem 1.6.                      B £e a submodule of a module A oiw a r//zg R. 77ze/j //ze quotient
                                                                                                                                     Theorem 1.10. // R is a ring and B is a submodule of an K-module A, then there is a
group A/B /s                    K-module with the action ofR on A/B given by:
                                                                                                                                     one-to-one correspondence between the set of all submodules of                                                           A containing B and the
                                    r( a   + B) = ra + B                           /or all   r e R,a e A.                            set of all submodules ofA/B, given byC\-> C/B. Hence every submodule
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of A/B is of
                                                                                                                                     the form C/B, where                            C is a submodule of A which contains B.
The map tt            :   A — A/B
                            >                    6y a |— a -f- Bis an K-module epimorphism with kernel B.
                                                                                                                                           PROOF. See Theorem 1.5.11 and Corollary 1.5.12.
       The map 7r is called the canonical epimorphism (or projection).
                                                                                                                                           Next we show that products and coproducts always exist in the category of
                                                                                                                                     /?-modules.
   SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.6. Since A is an additive abelian group, B is a
normal subgroup, and A/B is a well-defined abelian group. If a -\- B = a' + B,
then a — a' eB. Since B is a submodule     — ra' = r(# — a') eB for all re/?. Thus
ra + B = ra' + B by Corollary 1.4.3 and the action of R on A/B is well defined. The
                                                                                                                                 Theorem 1.11. Let K be a ring and (Ai               el} a nonempty family ofK-modules,    i



                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |




remainder of the proof is now easy.
                                                                                                                                     leI
                                                                                                                                           Ai the direct product of the abelian groups A i? and  A the direct sum of the                 ^  isl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i




                                                                                                                                 abelian groups Ai.
   In view of the preceding results it is not surprising that the various isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                Ai is an K-module with the action ofK given by rjail                                                = {rail.
theorems for groups (Theorems 1. 5. 6-1. 5. 12) are valid, mutatis mutandis, for modules.                                                             iel

One need only check at each stage of the proof to see that every subgroup or homo-                                                         (ii)
                                                                                                                                                      ^2 Ai is a submodule ofJ\ A                                 im


morphism is in fact a submodule or module homomorphism. For convenience we
list   these results here.
                                                                                                                                    (iii) For each k e I, the canonical projection ir
                                                                                                                                                                                      k                                            :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JJAj -> A k (Theorem 1.8.1) is
                                                                                                                                 an K-module epimorphism.
                                                                                                                                    (iv) For each k e I, the canonical injection t

                                                                                                                                 K-module monomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                   k                                           :   A k ->   ^ Ai (Theorem                           1.8.4) is an


Theorem 1.7. 7/R is a ring and f A — B is an K-module homomorphism and C is a
                                                                    :          »


submodule ofKer f, then there is a unique K-module homomorphism f A/C — B such                                 :     »
                                                                                                                                           PROOF. Exercise.
that f (a + C) = f(a) for all a e A; hn f = Imf and Ker f = Ker f/C. f is an K-module
isomorphism if and only iff is an K-module epimorphism and C = Ker f. In particular,                                                       II Ai is called the (external) direct product of the family of .R-modules \Ai\ieI}
A/ Ker f^ Imf.                                                                                                                   and                  A, is its (external) direct sum. If the index set is finite, say / =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        {   1 ,2,        .   .   .   ,   n       ,




       PROOF. See Theorem 1.5.6 and Corollary 1.5.7.                                                                             then the direct product and direct sum coincide and will be written A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l   @A @- -@A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2                                    n   .



                                                                                                                                 The maps ir k [resp. i k                       ]   are called the canonical projections [resp. injections].



                                                                                                                                 Tneorem 1.12. 7/R is a ring,    e I) a family ofK-modules, C an K-module, and
Corollary 1.8. 7/R is a ring and A' is a submodule of the K-module A and B' a sub-                                                                                                            {       {   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                              i


                                                                                                                                               C — Ai
                                                                                                                                                  a family of K-module homomorphisms, then there is a unique
module of the K-module B and f A —» B is an K-module homomorphism such that
                                                                                                                                 I   <fi   :
                                                                                                                                                      >          I
                                                                                                                                                                     i   e I(
                                                                :

                                                                                                                                 K-module homomorphism <p C ->
        B', then f induces an K-module homomorphism f A/A' — B/B' given by
          d                                                                                                                                                        Ai such that tt^ = <p- for all iel.   A is
f(A')                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                          :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JJ              {




a + A' |— f(a) + B'. f is an K-module isomorphism if and only iflm f + B' = B and
                  >                                                                                                              uniquely determined up to isomorphism by this property. In other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    words, JJ Ai is a
f (B') C A'. In particular iff is an epimorphism such that f(A') = B' and Ker f d A',
 -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                           ,                ,                                                                                                                        iel
                                                                                                                                 product in the category ofK-modules.
then f is an K-module isomorphism.
                                                                                                                                    PROOF. By Theorem 1.8.2 there is a unique group homomorphism <p C -> A i
                                                                                                                                                                                                               J\                                                               :



       PROOF. See Corollary 1.5.8.                                                                                               which has the desired property, given by <p(c) = {^(c)[ ie/ Since each <p is an R-                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A                                      ;                                                    A                           .




174                                                                                          CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                                               1.   MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES                                                                                                                       175


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n                 n
module homomorphism, p(rc) = {<fi(rc)} itI = {r^»(c)} le / = r{<pi(c)}i i = r<p(c) and
if is an /^-module homomorphism. Thus           is a product in the category of                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L^A^i =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t »" 7r »                = 1a-
/^-modules (Definition 1.7.2) and therefore determined up to isomorphism by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n           n                               n
Theorem 1.7.3.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Similarly            ^=J Z     i   = i y= i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i/^-ir/ = J2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nW = ^©...ev Therefore,                                                               <p    is   an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        isomorphism by Theorem 1.2.3.

Theorem 1.13. IfR is a ring,
                           Ai   e I a family ofR-modules,   an R-module, and                         {                |
                                                                                                                          i               }                                                                            D
{^i   :   Ai — D a family
                        > of R-module
                                    |
                                       homomorphisms,
                                          i       e 1} then there is a unique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Theorem 1.15. Let Rbea ring and
R-module homomorphism ^      A; ->    such that ypn =   for all e I. ^2 A is                 :
                                                                                                 £   izl
                                                                                                                                          D                                                                 &                          i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     itl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {             {       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i   e I }                a family ofsubmodules ofan R-module

uniquely determined up to isomorphism by this property. In other words, 22 Ai is a c0 ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           izl                                 A is the sum of the family Aj e I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            }


product in the category ofK-modules.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (ii)       for each k e I, A k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fl A k * = 0, where A k * is the sum of the family                                                                                  {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i    ^ k}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Then there is an isomorphism A ^        Ai.
      PROOF. By Theorem 1.8.5 there is                                                                                                                a unique abelian group homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16/
\p      Ai-^D with the desired property, given by yp{ {#»}) = X)                                                                                                                                                                    where the sum
                                                                                                                                                                                                             t


istaken over the finite set of indices / such that a { ^ 0. It is easy to see that \p is an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem L8.6.
^-module map. Hence           is a coproduct in the category of /^-modules (Definition

1.7.4), and therefore, determined up to isomorphism by Theorem 1.7.5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A module A is said to be the (internal) direct sum of a family of submodules
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        {Ai   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   izl} provided that A and {Ai) satisfy the hypotheses of Theorem 1.15. As in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the case of groups, there is a distinction between internal and external direct sums. If
      Finite direct sums occur so frequently that a further description of them will be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a module A is the internal direct sum of modules A u then by definition each of the Ai
useful. We first observe that if / and g are /^-module homomorphisms from an R-
module A to an .R-module B, then the map /+ g A — B given byah f(a) + g{a)                                                                                                         :                >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       is actually a           submodule of A and A is isomorphic to the external direct sum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 _A                                                                                                                          ^A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             iti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i-


is also an ^-module homomorphism. It is easy to verify that the set Hom R (/4,i?) of                                                                                                                                                                                   However the external direct                           sum J2                    < doe s not contain the modules A { but only
all ^-module homomorphisms A — B is an abelian group under this addition (Exer-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,

                                                                                                                      >                                                                                                                                                                                                              izl

cise 7). Furthermore addition of module homomorphisms is distributive with respect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       isomorphic copies of them (namely the                tt                     1.11 and Exercise    (A) — see Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.8.10).          Since this distinction is unimportant in practice, the adjectives "internal"
to composition of functions; that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and "external" will be omitted whenever the context is clear and the following nota-
                                                   h(f+g) = hf+hg and {f+g)k = fk + gk,                                                                                                                                                                                tion will be used.

where f,g                   :   A —> B, h B —> C, k D —> A.      :                                            :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOTATION. We write A =                                       A to indicate that the module A is the internal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       direct sum of the family of submodules                                                      {A
Theorem 1.14. Let R be a ring and A,Ai,A 2                                                                                                                    ,    .       .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                           A„ R-modules. Then A     A                                ^     Y       ©                                                                                                    {       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        izl}.

A2        A n if and only iffor each = 1,2,
           -
                    -
                                                                                                                                  i                                .       .   .       ,   n there are R-module homomor-
phisms 7Ti                  :   A — Ai and ^  >                                      :   A*          — A such that
                     - 1 Ai for = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Definition 1.16.A pair of module homomorphisms, A      B ^ C, is said to be exact
          (i)       TTiti                                                i                           .    .       .       n;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ai X
                                                                                                                      ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       at B provided Im f =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ker g. A finite sequence ofmodule homomorphisms, A
          (ii) TTjti = Ofor    ^ j;                          i


      (iii)         ti7Ti           +         t27T 2     +           '       *   '
                                                                                     + tn7T = 1a«     n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A -V --^ A n _i-A A n is exact provided Im U = Keri^forx = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,                        ,n — I. An                                                                   .   .   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       infinite sequence of module homomorphisms,                                                               •       •   -   ^A ^A ^A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  £   _i       {   i+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is exact

      PROOF. (=*) If A is the module A                                                                                                        l               A 0-2
                                                                                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                               -®A      n,       then the canonical in-                                provided Im U = Ker fi+1 /or a// i e Z.
jections ii and projections 7r t satisfy (i)-(iii) as the reader may easily verify. Likewise
if    ^^^©•©4             under an isomorphism /: A -> A x                     A n then the                                                                                                                  ©• •©     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                        When convenient we shall abuse the language slightly and refer to an exact se-
homomorphisms 7i\/ A — Ai and f~ a Ai—> A satisfy (i)-(iii).     :
                                                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                  :                                                                                                                    quence of modules rather than an exact sequence of module homomorphisms.
      (<=)              Let             7r t  -
                                                    A                >           Ai and a                             :   A   {                       A       (i           = 1,2, ...                   ,   «)     satisfy                 (i)-(iii).      Let
TTi   :   Ai@- -@ A n -^ Ai and u'
                                -
                                                                                                              :       A—              >       i4i     ©• -®A n be the canonical projections
                                                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EXAMPLES. Note first that for any module A, there are unique module homo-
and injections. Let                                          :       A©                  •   •   •
                                                                                                     © A — A be given by =n                                                                    <p       iitt/     +        i 2 7r 2 '      H           h in^n          morphisms      -> A and A — 0. If A and B are any modules then the sequences
and ^      —> /li ©•
                :                                        •
                                                                 •© A n by = nVi •+                                                                   i 2 '7r 2            H                    h tnV„. Then                                                           0^^A,4©fiA5^0and ^B A A ®B A A -> are exact, where the t's
                                                     / n                                 \ / n                                        \                                                                                n                                               and tt's are the canonical injections and projections respectively. Similarly, if C is a
                                ^ = V=i
                                     2              (
                                                                                         /\j
                                                                                            2)(
                                                                                                          =\                          /
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                                      =   ZE WV*-, = 2 ^.V^i
                                                                                                                                                          i   = iy=i                                               i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       submodule of D, then the sequence 0^C-^/)A D/C —                is exact, where / is the                                            >
176                                      CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                           1.        MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES                                                   177



inclusion map and p the canonical epimorphism. If /: A — B is a module homo-                     Thus        g'[(3(b) — b'] =    and 0(6) — 6' £ Ker g' = Im /' by exactness, say
morphism, then A/Ker /[resp. B/lm f] is called the coimage of /[resp. cokernel off]             f'(a')      = P(b) — b\ a' e A'. Since a is an epimorphism, a! = a(a) for some a £
and denoted Coim / [resp. Coker /]. Each of the following sequences is exact:                    Consider b — f(a)eB:
  _> Ker f—>A—^ Coim /-> 0,
A^>B-^> Coker
                                 -> Im /-> 5 -> Coker /->

                                0,
                                                                and     -> Ker /->

                                     where the unlabeled maps are the obvious inclusions and
                                                                                                                                                  m-    f(a)]   =   m - may
projections.                                                                                     By commutativity, fif(a) =                              = /'(<*') = 0(6) - 6'; hence
                                                                                                                                £[6 - /(«)] = (3(b) - (3f(a) = P(b) - (0(b) - b') = b'
       REMARKS.     — A -A B is an exact sequence of module homomorphisms if and
                            *

                                                                                                and               an epimorphism.
only if /is a module monomorphism. Similarly, B         C — is exact if and only if g
                                                                      >
                                                                                                            is



is a module   epimorphism. If A    5    C  is exact, then g/ = 0. Finally if A — £ A   >            (iii)        is   an immediate consequence of (i) and (ii).
C -> is exact, then Coker / = £/Im / = £/Ker g = Coim g ^ C. An exact se-
quence of the form 0-+A-^B^C->0is called a short exact sequence; note that /                        Two short exact sequences are said to be isomorphic if there is a commutative
is amonomorphism and g an epimorphism. The preceding remarks show that a short                  diagram of module homomorphisms
exact sequence is just another way of presenting a submodule (A ^ Im /) and its
quotient module (B/lm f = B/Ker g ^ C).
                                                                                                                                                     0-+A—+B-                    -0

                                                                                                                                                           /
Lemma 1.17. (The Short Five Lemma) Let R be a ring and                                                                                               0-+A'—          -C—-0
                                          o~+a-Lb-^c-+o                                         such that fg, and h are isomorphisms. In this case, it is easy to verify that the
                                                                                                diagram
                                                                  7
                                                              "
                                               t
                                                   f 1   a'




                                                                                                                                                                      h~ l
a commutative diagram of R-modules and R-module homomorphisms such that each
row is a short exact sequence. Then                                                                                                                 0-+A'-+B'-+C'-+0
        (i)    a,y monomorphisms =>      is a monomorphism;

        (ii)   a y epimorphisms => /3 is an epimorphism;
                 9
                                                                                                (with the same horizontal maps) is also commutative. In fact, isomorphism of short
       (iii)   a,y isomorphisms => /? /$ tf« isomorphism.                                       exact sequences is an equivalence relation (Exercise 14).



       PROOF, (i) Let b e 5 and suppose 0(6) = 0; we must show that b = 0. By com-
mutativity we have
                                                                                                Theorem 1.18. Let Rbea ring and —»Ai—>B-^A 2 —                                                 short exact sequence of
                                        7S<« = *W« = tf'(O) = 0.                                R-module homomorphisms. Then the following conditions are equivalent.

This implies     = 0, since 7 is a monomorphism. By exactness of the top row at B,                    (i)    There is an R-module homomorphism h   A — B with gh = A2 :      2                                1   ;


we have b e Ker g = Im /, say 6 = /(a), a e A. By commutativity,                                    (ii)     There is an R-module homomorphism k   B — Ai with kf = IaiJ
                                                                                                                                                                      :          >

                                                                                                    (iii) the given sequence is isomorphic (with identity maps on A  and A to the                                      2)
                                          /'a(a) = 0f(a) = P(b) = 0.                                                                                                                                      1


                                                                                                direct sum short exact sequence         — A, A Ai A           A  — 0; in particular   2         2

By exactness of the bottom row at A\ f is a monomorphism (Theorem 1.2.3(0);                     B ^ Ai        A            2.

hence a(a) = 0. But a is a monomorphism; therefore a =                    and hence 6 = f(a)
= /(0) = 0. Thus (3 is a monomorphism.                                                              A short exact sequence that satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 1.18 is
                                                                                                said to be split or a split exact sequence.
       (ii)    Let 6' £ 5'. Then g'(b') £ C; since 7 is an epimorphism        = 7(c) for some
c s C. By exactness of the top row at C, g is an epimorphism; hence c = g(b) for
                                                                                                    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.18. (i) => (iii) By Theorem 1.13 the homomor-
some b £ 5. By commutativity,
                                                                                                phisms       /and h induce a module homomorphism <p                                       :   Ai® A   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -^> B,   given by
                                            = 7S(6) = 7to = S'(b').                             (aua 2 ) h> f(a0                + h(a   2 ).   Verify that the diagram
178                                    CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                  1.        MODULES, HOMOMORPHISMS AND EXACT SEQUENCES                                                                            179



                                  O-^i-^i © A -^A +
                                                                                                                                                   (b) If / is a two-sided ideal, then A/ 1A is an /^//-module with the action of R/I
                                                                    2        2
                                                                                                                                              given by (r                +           7)(<z       + IA) = ra + IA.
                                                                                                                                        4. If      has an identity, then every unitary cyclic /^-module is isomorphic to an
                                                               —l+A -+0      2                                                                /^-module of the form R/J, where J is a left ideal of R.


iscommutative (use the fact that gf =                                   and gh =                   \ A2 ).   By the Short Five          5.    IfR has an identity, then a nonzero unitary 7?-module A is simple if its only sub-
Lemma <p is an isomorphism,                                                                                                                   modules are and A.
                                                                                                                                                (a) Every simple /^-module is cyclic.
   (ii) => (iii) The diagram
                                                                                                                                                (b) If A is simple every /^-module endomorphism is either the zero map or an
                                                                                                                                              isomorphism.
                                                 /                                        -0
                                                                                                                                        6.   A finitely generated /^-module need not be finitely generated as an abelian group.
                                       1a,                                    *   At                                                         [Hint: Exercise II.1.10.]

                                  0-^A ^lA   l          l      A2   ^A -+0   2
                                                                                                                                        7.   (a) If A and B are /^-modules, then the set Hom R (A,B) of all /^-module homo-
                                                                                                                                             morphisms A — B is an abelian group with /+ g given on a e A by (/+ g)(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                         >

is commutative, where \p is the module homomorphism given by \p(b) = (k(b),g(b))
                                                                                                                                              — f(a) + g(a) £ B- The identity element is the zero map.
(see Theorem 1.12). Hence the short Five Lemma implies \p is an isomorphism.
                                                                                                                                             (b) Hom R (A A) is a ring with identity, where multiplication is composition of
                                                                                                                                                                         y

    (iii) => (ii) Given a commutative diagram with exact rows and   an isomor-                                        </?
                                                                                                                                             functions. Wom R (A,A) is called the endomorphism ring of A.
phism:
                                                                                                                                             (c) A is a left Hom (A,A)-module with fa defined to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                 fl




                                  0-^^r^i                       /* 2    ^/*   2
                                                                                     -    -0                                                                                                          f(a) (a e A,fe   Hom R (A,A)).
                                                                        t2

                                                                                     1,                                                 8.   Prove that the obvious analogues of Theorem 1.8.10 and Corollary 1.8.11 are
                                                                                                                                             valid for /^-modules.
                                                 /                                        -0,
                                                                                                                                        9. If      / A —» A is an /^-module homomorphism such that ff = / then
                                                                                                                                                     :




define h :A 2 ^>B to be        <pi 2   and A:                       to be tt^" 1Use the commutativity
                                                                                               .




of the diagram and the facts irm =
                                                                -
                                                                   =            show that kf = l Al and                                                                                                     A = Ker /0 Im /.
                                                     l Ai ,   v? V   1ai@a 2 to
gh =               m
        1 A2 .
                                                                                                                                       10.   Let A,A U       A n be /^-modules. Then A ^ A 0- -0 A n if and only if for
                                                                                                                                                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                              Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •




                                                                                                                                             each / =             n there is an ^-module homomorphism <p
                                                                                                                                                                1,2,         .       .   .   ,                  A — A such that                           x;   :




                                                                                                                                             Im <fi ^ A,; ifufj =        for    ^ j\ and <pi + <^ +      + <Pn = 1 a- [Hint: If
                                                                                                                                                                                                              /                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            •       •




                                             EXERCISES                                                                                       /l = /li©---©A let 7Ti,it be as in Theorem 1.14 and define <pi = li-Wi. Con-


      Note: R is a ring.                                                                                                                     versely, given f<p,-}, show that ^i^t = <p Let ^ = ^ Im ^           Im & — /I and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t                      |              t   :




                                                                                                                                             apply Theorem 1.14 with A, Im ^„          and \pi in place of /i, A tt and                                                {,    x ,   i,-.]

 1.   If /4   is   an abelian group and n >                   an integer such that na =                               for all a e A,
      then /4 is a unitary Zn -module, with the action of Zn on /4 given by ka = ka,                                                   11.   (a) IfA is a module over a commutative ring R and a e A, then ^a = {r e
      where A: s Z and A: |— k sZn under the canonical projection Z —Z,,.
                              >
                                                                                                                                             = 0} is an ideal of R. If Oa ^ 0, # is said to be a torsion element of A.
                                                                                                                                             (b) If R is an integral domain, then the set T(A) of all torsion elements of A is a
      Let /: A — > Z? be an /^-module homomorphism.
 2.
                                                                                                                                             submodule of                            A (T(A)          is   called the torsion submodule.)
        (a) /is a monomorphism if and only if for every pair of /^-module homomor-
                                                                                                                                             (c)    Show that (b) may be false for a commutative ring R, which is not an integral
      phisms g,h:D^ A such that fg = fh, we have g = h. {Hint: to prove («=), let
                                                                                                                                             domain.
      D = Ker /, with g the inclusion map and h the zero map.]
        (b) /is an epimorphism if and only if for every pair of /^-module homomor-                                                                  In (d) — (f) R is an integral domain.
      phisms k,t\B^ Csuch that kf = tf, we have k = t. [Hint: to prove («=), let k
                                                     — Z?/Im / and                                                                           (d) If /       :    A -> B is an ^-module homomorphism, then f(T(A)) d T(B); hence
      be the canonical epimorphism B                                             /       the zero map.]
                                                                                                                                             the restriction fT of / to T(A)         is an tf-module homomorphism T(A) — T(B).                                                     >



 3.   Let / be a left ideal of a ring R and A an /^-module.                                                                                  (e)    If          —> A    B ^+ C is an exact sequence of /^-modules, then so is
        (a) If 5 is a nonempty subset of /4,
                                                      U=
                                                               then IS =                  X    i
                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                            " s N*; r e /; a,- e S f
                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                            t

                                                                                                                                   J         (f)
                                                                                                                                                     T(A) ^> r(£) ^> T(C).
                                                                                                                                                    If # B — C is an /^-module epimorphism, then gr
                                                                                                                                                           :                                                                                        :   T(B)                T(C) need not
      is a submodule of /L Note that if S = {a}, then IS = la = fra                                               |
                                                                                                                      r e /}.                be an epimorphism. [Hint: consider abelian groups.]
                       l                                                                                                                                                                           r




180                                                     CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                        2.       FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                             181

                                                                                                                                                the special properties of the dimension of a vector space (Theorems and Corollaries
12.   (The Five Lemma). Let                                                                                                                     2.13-2.16).
                                                                                                                                                    A subset X of an /^-module A is said to be linearly independent provided that for
                                                        Ai—*~A 2 —^3 -*~A A —*~A 5
                                                                                                                                                distinct x u   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                           ,   x n e X and n e R.

                                                        |
                                                                ai   j** 2
                                                                                 |
                                                                                     a3
                                                                                              J**
                                                                                     —*~B± —**Bs
                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                            J**
                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                       nxi       +rx H 2   2                1-   rn x n   =         ==>    =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rt                   for every /.
                                                        B\ —         Z?2 —+*Bz
                                                                                                                                                A set that is not linearly independent is said to be linearly dependent. If A is generated
                                                                                                                                                as an /^-module by a set F, then we say that Y spans A If R has an identity and A is             .

      be a commutative diagram of /^-modules and /^-module homomorphisms, with
                                                                                                                                                unitary, Y spans A if and only if every element of A may be written as a linear com-
      exact rows. Prove that:
                                                                                                                                                bination: r 1 y 1 + r2 y 2 H rn y n (r e R,y e Y); see Theorem 1.5. A linearly inde-
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t           t
         (a) ai an epimorphism and a 2i ai monomorphisms =* a s is a monomorphism;
                                                                                                                                                pendent subset of A that spans A is called a basis of A. Observe that the empty set is
         (b) a 5 a monomorphism and 0:2,0:4 epimorphisms => 0:3 is an epimorphism.
                                                                                                                                                (vacuously) linearly independent and is a basis of the zero module (see Defini-

13. (a) If                     -> A   —£            C ->         and O^C-^Z)—                                     >0are short exact sequences   tion 1.4).

      of modules, then the sequence 0->/i—>Z?^>Z)—>£—>0is exact.
      (b) Show that every exact sequence may be obtained by splicing together suit-
                                                                                                                                                Theorem 2.1. Let R be a ring with identity. The following conditions on a unitary
      able short exact sequences as in (a).
                                                                                                                                                R-module F are equivalent:
14.   Show that isomorphism of short exact sequences is an equivalence relation.
                                                                                                                                                      (i)   F has a nonempty basis;
15. If  / A-+B and g B — A are /^-module homomorphisms such that gf = 1 A
               :                                :       >                                                                                   ,        (ii)   F is the internal direct sum of a family of cyclic R-modules, each of which is
      then B = Im /0 Ker g.                                                                                                                     isomorphic as a left R-module to R;
                                                                                                                                                    (iii)   F is R-module isomorphic to a direct sum of copies of the left R-module R;
16.   Let R be a ring and i? op its opposite ring (Exercise III. 1.17). If A is a left [resp.
                                                                                                                                                    (iv) there exists  a nonempty set X and a function       X — F with the following                 1   :       >
      right] /^-module, then A is a right [resp. left] /^-module such that ra =       for all
                                                                                                                                                property: given any unitary R-module                                   A and function f X — A, there exists a unique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :

      a s A, r s R, r e R              op
                                                                                                                                                                                                        F — A such that ft = i. In other words, F is a free object
                                            .

                                                                                                                                                R-module homomorphism f                            :        >


17. (a) IfR has an identity and A is an /^-module, then there are submodules B and                                                              in the category of unitary R-modules.

      C of A such that B is unitary, C =             and A = B@C. [Hint: let
      B = R a \as A] and C = [aeA l R a = 0} and observe that for all ae A,
                   {                                                         \
                                                                                                                                                   The theorem is proved below. A unitary module F over a ring R with identity,
      a — l R a e C]                                                                                                                            which satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 2.1, is called a free R-module on
      (b) Let Ai be another /^-module, with A = B        G (B unitary, RCi = 0). If       x             x             x
                                                                                                                                                the set X. By Theorem 2.1 (iv), F is a free object in the category of all unitary left

      /  :A —  y4i is an /^-module
                           >        homomorphism   then  /(Z?) C Z?i and /(C) C Ci.                                                             /^-modules. But such an F is not a free object in the category of all left /^-modules
      (c) If the map /of part (b) is an epimorphism [resp. isomorphism], then so are                                                            (Exercise 15). By definition the zero module is the free module on the empty set.
                   Bi and / C C-> G.                                                                                                                It is possible to define free modules in the category of all left i?-modules over an
      f B B
         \
                   :                                |
                                                            :



                                                                                                                                                arbitrary ring R (possibly without identity); see Exercise 2. Such a free module is not
18.   Let              be a ring without identity. Embed R in a ring S with identity and char-                                                  isomorphic to a direct sum of copies of R, even when R does have an identity (Exer-
      acteristic zero as in the proof of Theorem III. 1.10. Identify     R with its image in 5.                                                 cise 2). In a few carefully noted instances below, certain results are also valid for
             (a)       Show that every element of S may be uniquely expressed in the form                                                       these free modules in the category of all left /?-modules.                                                       However, unless stated
      rls     + nlsireR, neZ).                                                                                                                  otherwise, the term "free module" will always mean a unitary free module in the
        (b) If A is an R -module and a e A, show that there is a unique R -module
                                                                                                                                                sense of Theorem 2.1.
      homomorphism / S-+A such that /(Is) = a. [Hint: Let f(r\ s + n\ s ) = ra +
                                           :




      na.]                                                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.1. (i) => (ii) Let X be a basis of F and x eX. The
                                                                                                                                                map R —> Rx, given by rn> rx, is an /^-module epimorphism by Theorem 1.5. If
                                                                                                                                                rx = 0, then r =  by linear independence, whence the map is a monomorphism and
                                                                                                                                                R = Rx as left /^-modules. Verify that F is the internal direct sum of the cyclic
2.    FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                                                                            modules Rx (x eX).
      In this section we study free objects in the category of modules over a ring. Such
                                                                                                                                                    (ii) ==> (iii)     Theorem 1.15 and Exercise 1.8.
free modules, the most important examples of which are vector spaces over a division
ring (Theorem 2.4), have widespread applications in many areas of mathematics. The
                                                                                                                                                   (iii)    => (i) Suppose             F^^R and the copies of R are indexed by a X. For each                               set
                                                                                                                                                x e X let 6 X be the element               of ^R, where     =         x and    = R Verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r{      for            9^          rx      1
special case of free abelian groups (Z-modules) will serve as a model for the first
                                                                                                                                                                                               {    t }                                          i'                               .




part of this section. The remainder of the section consists of a discussion of the di-
                                                                                                                                                {6X \xsX] is a basis of                ^R and use the isomorphism F ^ ^R to obtain a basis of                                          F.

mension (or rank) of a free module (Theorems 2.6-2.12) and an investigation of
                                                                                                                                                   (i) ==> (iv) Let A' be a                basis of F and t               :   X —* F the inclusion map. Suppose we are
                                            d




182                                                         CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                            2.   FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                                                183


                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.2. Let X be a set of generators of A and F the free
given a map /                    :   X— A. If u F, then u = X) w (n R,Xi eX) since X spans F. If
                                        >                   e                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                    X — A induces an /^-module homo-
                                                                                                                                                         /^-module on the set A". Then the inclusion map
           n                                                                    t   =1                                                                                                                                                   >


                                                                                                                                                         morphism / :F'— A such that X CZ Im / (Theorem 2.1 (iv)). Since X generates A,
w =
     =1
       X
       1                 i
                             U   £      then            X   ( r*
                                                                   —         = 0, whence n = Si for every by linear in-             /

                                                                                                                                                         we must have Im f= A.
                                                                                                                                                                                     >




dependence. Consequently, the map f :F-* A given by

                                                                                                                                                            REMARK. Unlike the situation with free abelian groups, a submodule of a free
                                                        /(«) = /(       £
                                                                       V=i     /
                                                                                     =   £
                                                                                         l= i                                                            module over an arbitrary ring need not be free. For instance {0,2,4} is a submodule
                                                                                                                                                         ofZ6 but is clearly not a freeZ6 -module; compare Theorem II. 1.6 and Theorem 6.1
                                                                                                                                                                   ,


is   a well-defined function such that fi = f. Verify that /is an i?-module homomor-                                                                     below.
phism. Since                 X generates F, any i?-module homomorphism F — A                                           »       is uniquely deter-

mined by its action on A\ Thus, if g F —> ^ is an i?-module homomorphism such
                                                                         :
                                                                                                                                                              Vector spaces over a division ring D (Definition 1.1) are important, among other
that gt = /, then for every x eX,g(x) = gdW) = /(*) = f(x), whence g = /and
                                                                                                                                                         reasons, because every vector space over            D is in fact a free D-module. To prove this
/is unique. Therefore, by Definition 1.7.7 F is a free object on the set X in the cate-
                                                                                                                                                         we need
gory of unitary i?-modules.
   (iv) =» (iii) Given l :X—>F construct the direct sum £/?, w tn one co P v °^ ^ ^or                                  *



each x e X. Let Y =      x x e X) be the basis of the (unitary) i?-module
                                        {           \
                                                                            as in the                                                   £#
proof of (iii) => (i). The proof of (iii) =» (i) =» (iv) shows that £/* is a free object on                                                              Lemma 2.3. A maximal linearly independent subset X of a vector space V over a
the set Y in the category of i?-modules (with Y                  the inclusion map). Since -^^R                                                          division ring         D is a basis ofV.
\X\ = Y|, the proof of Theorem 1.7.8 implies that there is an ^-module isomorphism
            |




f :F = £* such that f(i(X)) = Y.                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                            PROOF. Let be the subspace of V spanned by the set A". Since X is linearly in-
                                                                                                                                                         dependent and spans W, X is a basis of W.\iW= V, we are done. If not, then there
      REMARKS, (a) If F is a free .R-module on a set Aft X -> F), then the proof of                     :
                                                                                                                                                         exists a nonzero a e  V with a\W. Consider the set X U {a} If ra + nxi +            +             .                                     •   •   •




(iv) =» (iii) of Theorem 2.1                              implies that i(Af) is actually a basis of F.                                                   rn x n   —                     ^ 0, then a = r~ (ra) = — r~ nxi —
                                                                                                                                                                            (r,n £ D,Xi eX) and r                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               — r~ rn xn e IV,   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l



                                                                                                                                                         which contradicts the choice of a. Hence r = 0, which implies n =    for all since A"                                               /


                                                                                                                                                         is linearly independent. Consequently X U {a} is a linearly independent subset of V,
      (b) Conversely, the proof of (i) =* (iv) of Theorem 2.1 shows that if A' is a basis of
                                                                                                                                             X — F the   contradicting the maximality of X. Therefore W = V and X is a basis.
a unitary module F over a ring                                     with identity, then F is free on X, with t                            :        >


inclusion map.
   (c) If X is any nonempty set and R is a ring with identity, then the proof of

Theorem 2.1 shows how to construct a free /^-module on the set X. Simply let F be                                                                        Theorem 2.4. Every vector space V over a division ring has a basis and is therefore  D
the direct sum^R, with the copies of R indexed by the set X. In the notation of the                                                                      a free D-module. More generally every linearly independent subset of V is contained in                              "




proof, 6X x £ X) is a basis of F so that F = Z R 0*- since tne ma P
                {       |
                                                                     A' — F, given                                              t   :        >           a basis ofV.

by x \-> X is injective it follows easily that F is free on A' in the sense of condition (iv)
                    ,


                                                                     with its image under t,                    X                                             The converse of Theorem 2.4 is also true, namely, if every unitary module over a
of Theorem 2.1. In this situation we shall usually identify
writing x in place of X so that        CZ F. In this notation F = 22
                                                ,                  X            is written as
                                                                                                                       xeX
                                                                                                                               ^                         ring     D with identity is free, then D is a division ring (Exercise 3.14).

22 fl* and a typical element of F has the form r xi +                                       Y
                                                                                                    •       •   •
                                                                                                                    + r x (n e R;x eX). In
                                                                                                                       n   v                  {
                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.4. The first statement is an immediate con-
xeX
particular,                 X = i(X) is a basis of F.                                                                                                    sequence of the second since the null set is a linearly independent subset of every
      (d)       The existence of free modules on a given set in the category of all modules                                                              vector space. Consequently, we assume that X is any linearly independent subset of V

over an arbitrary ring (possibly without identity) is proved in Exercise 2.                                                                              and let S be the set of all linearly independent subsets of V that contain X. Since
                                                                                                                                                         X e S, ^ 0. Partially order S by set theoretic inclusion. If
                                                                                                                                                                       oS                                                                             {   C»-   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s /} is a chain in S

                                                                                                                                                         verify that the set             C = (J C» is linearly independent and hence an element of S.
Corollary 2.2. Every (unitary) module A over a ring R (with identity^ is the homomor-                                                                    Clearly C is an upper bound for the chain            (   d   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /   £ /(   .   By Zorn's Lemma S contains a
phic image of a free R-moduIe F. If A is finitely generated, then F may be chosen to be                                                                  maximal element B that contains X and is necessarily a maximal linearly inde-
finitely generated.                                                                                                                                      pendent subset of V. By Lemma 2.3 B is a basis of V.


      REMARK. Corollary 2.2 and its proof are valid if the words in parentheses are
deleted and "free module" is taken to mean a free module in the category of all left                                                                     Theorem 2.5. //V is a vector space over a division ring D and X is a subset that
modules over an arbitrary ring (as defined in Exercise 2).                                                                                               spans V, then X contains a basis ofV.
184                                                                  CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                         2.                      FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                                                185



      SKETCH OF PROOF. Partially order the set S of all linearly independent                                                                  Interchanging* and Y in the preceding argument shows that |y| < |*|. Therefore
subsets of* by inclusion. Zorn's Lemma implies the existence of a maximal linearly                                                            \Y\ = |*| by the Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem.

independent subset Y of *. Every element of X a linear combination of elements of               is

Y (otherwise, as in Lemma 2.3, we could construct a linearly independent subset of X
that properly contained Y, contradicting maximality). Since X spans V, so does Y.
                                                                                                                                              Theorem 2.7. // V is a vector space over a division ring D, then any two bases of V
                                                                                                                                              have the same cardinality.
Hence Y is a basis of V.

                                                                                                                                                   PROOF. Let* and Y be bases of V. If either* or Y is infinite, then |*| = \Y\ by
    In the case of free abelian groups (Z-modules) we know that any two bases of a                                                            Theorem 2.6. Hence we assume * and Y are finite, say * = {*i,                  xn     and                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                   \   ,


free Z-module have the same cardinality (Theorem II. 1.2). Unfortunately, this is not                                                         Y = {y u             Since * and Y are bases,
                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                             ym.   .
                                                                                                                                                                       ,    ]
                                                                                                                                                                                    .             ^ ym = nxi H     h r n x n for some
true for free modules over arbitrary rings with identity (Exercise 13).                                                        We shall now   ti s Z). If is the first nonzero r
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                 then x k = rk ym — r k r k+ \Xk+\ —       — r k ~ rn x n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l           l               •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .



show that vector spaces over a division ring and free modules over a commutative                                                              Therefore, the set *' = {y mi x u    x k - U x k+u ...,*„} spans V (since * does). In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,

ring with identity have this property.                                                                                                        particular

                                                                                                                                                     ym -\ = smym                           + hxi H      + /* + + H       h n *n (Wi £ £)•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h /*_!**_!        iAjfc   i       r



                                                                                                                                              Not all of the               are zero (otherwise y m -i — sm ym = 0, which contradicts the linear in-
Theorem 2.6. Let R be a ring with identity and F a free R-module with an infinite                                                             dependence of Y). If tj is the first nonzero r                                                       t,   then Xj is a linear combination of
basis X. Then every basis ofF has the same cardinality as X.
                                                                                                                                              ym-uy m and those x with                      {                             /   ^ y,/c. Consequently, the set [ym -i,ym U jx  )                       t       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /               y,/c(

                                                                                                                                              spans F (since*' does). In particular, ym -i is a linear combination of y m -i,ym and the
      PROOF. If Y is another basis of F, then we claim that Y is infinite. Suppose on                                                         Xi with /   ^ j,k. The above process of adding a                                                     >>   and eliminating an x may therefore
the contrary that Y were finite. Since Y generates  F and every element of Y is a                                                             be repeated. At the end of the kth step we have a set consisting ofy m ,y m -i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ym -k+i                                                             .       .       .       ,


linear combination of a finite number of elements of*, it follows that there is a finite                                                      and A2 — /c of the xwhich spans V.lf n < m, then at the end of n steps we would
                                                                                                                                                                                        t ,


subset [xi,            .       .       .
                                           ,
                                               xm      ]
                                                           of*, which generates F. Since X is infinite, there exists                          conclude that \y m     ym -n+\} spans F. Since w — n + 1 > 2, >>i would be a linear
                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,




                                                                          x s* — \x u   .   .   .       xm       .
                                                                                                                                              combination of ym       ym _ n+ i, which would contradict the linear independence of
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,


                                                                                                                                              Y. Therefore, we must have m < n. A similar argument with the roles of * and Y re-
                                                                                                    ,        \




Then for some neR, x = r xi H                                         {           h rm xmi which contradicts the linear inde-                 versed shows that n < m and hence m = n.
pendence of X. Therefore, Y is infinite.

                                                                                                                                              Definition 2.8. Le/ R be a ring with identity such that for every free R-module F, any
      Let K(Y) be the set of all finite subsets of Y. Define a map /          K(Y) by
                                                                                                                                              two bases ofF have the same cardinality. Then R is said to have the invariant dimension
xH    >
       )yu     y
               . n .where x.
                            =   nyi,H      h r n
                                               } y n
                                                   ,
                                                     and n ^ for all Since Y is a basis,                                 /'.


                                                                                                                                              property and the cardinal number of any basis ofFis called the dimension (or rank) of
the yi are uniquely determined and / is a well-defined function, (which need not be
                                                                                                                                              F over R.
injective). If Im                   |J         / were finite, then                 S would be a finite subset of Y that would
                                   Selmf
generated and hence F. This leads to a contradiction of the linear independence of Y                                                             Theorem 2.7 states that every division ring has the invariant dimension property.
as in the preceding paragraph. Hence Im /is infinite.                                                                                         We shall follow the widespread (but not universal) practice of using "dimension"
    Next we show that f~ (T) is a finite subset of X for every Te Im /C K(Y). If
                                                                l
                                                                                                                                              when referring to vector spaces over a division ring and "rank" when referring to free
x s f'KT), then x is contained in the submodule FT of F generated by T\ that is,                                                              modules over other rings. The dimension of a vector space V over a division ring D
  l
f~ (T)     C
          FT (see Theorem 1.5). Since T is finite and each y e T is a linear combina-                                                         will be denoted here by d\m D V. The properties of dim D V will be investigated after

tion of a finite number of elements of X, there is a finite subset S of* such that FT is                                                      Corollary 2.12. Results 2.9-2.12 are not needed in the sequel, except in Sections
contained in the submodule Fs of F generated by 5. Thus x e f~ (T) implies x eFs                                                              IV.6 and VII.5.
                                                                                                                           l




and x is a linear combination of elements of S (Theorem 1 .5). Since x eX and                                              SCI,
this contradicts the linear                                         independence of         X unless x eS. Therefore, f~ (T) C 5, l




whence f~ (T) is finite.
                   l                                                                                                                          Proposition 2.9. Let E and F be free modules over a ring R that has the invariant
    For each r e Im / order the elements of f~ (T\ say x u ... x n and define an in-            l
                                                                                                                     ,     ,
                                                                                                                                              dimension property. Then E                                                      ^ F if and only ifF and F have the same rank.
jective map #r •./-KD-^Im /X N by x k \-+(T,k). Verify that the sets f~\T)
(Te Im /) form a partition of*. It follows that the map *-> Im /X N defined
                                                                                                                                                 PROOF. Exercise; see Proposition II. 1.3.
by x H> grOO, where x e f~\T) is a well-defined injective function, whence  9



1*1 < |Im fx N|. Therefore by Definition 8.3, Theorem 8.11, and Corollary 8.13 of
                                                                                                                                              Lemma 2.10. Let R be a ring with identity, I (^ R) an ideal of R, F a free R-module
the Introduction:
                                                                                                                                                     X and it F — F/IF the canonical epimorphism. Then F/IF is a free R/I-
                                                                                                                                              with basis                                :                           >



                                   |*|             < |Im fX N| = |Im /| K = |Im/| < \K(Y)\ =                                                  module with basis 7r(X) and \tt(X)\ = |X|.
186                                                          CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                           2.   FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                        187


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 2.13. Let W be a subspace of a vector space V over a division ring D.
      Recall that IF =                     X! Wi              |
                                                                  rt e I, ai e F, n e
                                                                          :
                                                                                                                  N*   |   and that the action of R/I on
                                           i       =i                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (i) dimvW < dimnV;
F/IF is given by (r +                                   + Z/                  = ra + IF (Exercise 1.3).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        if dimifN = dimvV and dim^f is finite, then W = V;
                                                                  7
                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (ii)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (iii) dimvV = dim D W + <//w D (V/W).


      PROOF OF 2.10. If u + IF e F/IF, then w =                                                                            ^
                                                                                                                           i=l
                                                                                                                                r,*,-      with r, £ tf,                  e* since
« £ F and* is a basis of F. Consequently, u                                                       + IF =                         r;x ; )    + /F = 2^ fa"*; + ^)                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Let Y be a basis of W. By Theorem 2.4 there is a
                                                                                                                           j                                  i                                           basis* of V containing Y. Therefore, $\m D                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = \Y\ < \X\ = dim D V. (ii) If \Y\ = \X\
=     X   ('"j       + 0(Xj + IF) = 22 (r, + /)7r(x
                                                                                  m
                                                                                              ;   ),     whence                ?r(*)       generates                                 as           an      and    is finite, then since                 yclwe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                must have Y = X, whence       — V. (iii) We shall      W
      j                                                  j
                                                                                                                                                                                                          show that U = \x +                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x zX - Y\ is a basis of V/W. This will imply (by Defini-
R/ /-module. On the other hand, if
                                                                               k=l
                                                                                  ^    (r k       + I)ir(x          k)      =         with r k £ R and *i,                   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                         .   ,    xm
                                                                                                                                                                                                          tion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \




                                                                                                                                                                                                               8.3 of the Introduction) that dim^K = |*| = |y| + |* - 7| = |7| + \U\

distinct             elements           of *,           then                       =   ^               (r k   + I)w(x = ^        k)                   ( r*   + 7)(^ + IF                           )       = d\m D W + &\m D (V/W). If v e V, then v = ny +     s x            ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (^ s £ D'> % £ Y     {             i       i        <                \

                                                                                         k                                                      k                                                                                                                               X                  j
= 22 r*** + ^> whence 22                                                      £          Tnus 22                               = 22                   witn        s i £ ^>           w   >
                                                                                                                                                                                             £    F   -   Xjt-X- Y)               so    that   v+ W = X) sfa + W). Therefore, U spans V/W. If
      k                                                 k                                                     k                       j

Since each u            1
                                is   a linear combination of elements of                                                   * and /          is      an ideal, 22 s u i
                                                                                                                                                                      j      m
                                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                             *   s a      z2 r i( x + w) = 0(rjE D;xjsX — Y), then
                                                                                                                                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i                                                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r{ Xj e   W, whence                 ^ x =^ y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r;   ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sk   k


linear combination of elements of                              Consequently, 22   X with coefficients in                              /.                                                                  (s k e   D;y k e Y). This contradicts the linear independence of X = Y U (X — Y) unless
                                d                                              k= l                                                                                                                       r,   = 0, sk =          for all j,k. Therefore,       U is linearly independent and U\ = \X — Y\.
= 22 s i u i = 22 c *yt with c« £ /, y% e*. The linear independence of X implies that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |




    j           =i          t


(after reindexing and inserting terms 0x k 0y if necessary) m = d, x k = y k and                   ,          t



rk = c k e I for every k. Hence r k -f / =   in     for every  and 7r(*) is linearly in-
dependent over R/I. Thus F/IF is a free /?//-module with basis f(I) (Theorem 2.1).
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Corollary 2.14.              Iff:V—*V'isa linear transformation of vector spaces over a divi-
Finally if x, x' £ Zand tt(x) =                              tv(x') in F/IF, then (1*                                      + /M*) - (U + /M*') = 0.                                                       sion ring D, then there exists a basis     X of V such that X D Ker f is a basis ofKer f and
If x 9^ x' , the preceding argument implies that 1^ £ /, which contradicts the fact that
                                                                                                                                                                                                          {f(x)     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        f(x)   ^0,xeX| is a basis oflmf. In particular,
I 9^ R.      Therefore, x                  = x' and the map w                                                     X — 7r(*)                is       a bijection, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dimr>V = dimr>(Ker f)       + dim^Im
                                                                                                              :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. To prove the first statement let W = Ker /and let Y,X
Proposition 2.11. Let f R — > S be a nonzero epimorphism of rings with identity. If
                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                          be as in the proof of Theorem 2.13. The second statement follows from Theorem 2.13
S has the invariant dimension property, then so does R.                                                                                                                                                   (iii)    since       V/W ^ Im /by Theorem 1.7.
      PROOF. Let / = Ker/;thenS ^ R/I (Corollary III. 2. 10). Let*and 7 be bases
of the free /^-module F and wF—        the canonical epimorphism. By Lemma
                                                                  :               >


2.10 F/IF is a free /?//-module (and hence a free S-module) with bases tt(X) and ir(Y)                                                                                                                    Corollary 2.15.              //V and W are finite dimensional subspaces of a vector space over a
such that |*| = \tt(X)\,     = k(y)|. Since 5 has the invariant dimension property,
                                               \
                                                   Y\                                                                                                                                                     division ring D, then
\tt(X)\ = 7r(y)|. Therefore, \X\ = \Y\ and R has the invariant dimension property.
                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dim D V +       ^ W=     D   dimr>(V   D W) + dimr>(V + W).

Corollary 2.12. IfR is a ring with identity that has a homomorphic image which is a
division ring, then R has the invariant dimension property. In particular, every com-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Let* be a basis of V D W, Y a (finite) basis of V that
mutative ring with identity has the invariant dimension property.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Z a (finite) basis of W that contains * (Theorem 2.4). Show that
                                                                                                                                                                                                          contains *, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                          * U (Y - X) U (Z - *) a basis of V + W, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       is


      PROOF.                The first statement follows from Theorem 2.7 and Proposition 2.11. If                                                                                                                               dim D (V + IV) = \X\ + \Y-X\ + \Z-X\ = dim D (V D W)
R is commutative with identity, then R contains a maximal ideal                                                                                              M (Theorem                                                                                     + (dim^K - dimz)(K D W))
III.2.18)        and R/M is a field (Theorem III.2.20). Thus the second statement                                                                                                            is   a
special case of the first.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + (dim^ - dim^K D W)). m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Recall that if a division ring R is contained in a division ring S, then S is a vector
    We return now to vector spaces over a division ring and investigate the properties
of dimension. A vector space V over a division ring D is said to be finite dimensional                                                                                                                    space over R with rs (s e S,r e /?) the ordinary product in S. The following theorem

if &\m D   V is finite.                                                                                                                                                                                   will     be needed for the study of field extensions in Chapter V.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                                                                                          .




188                                                                   CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                         2.    FREE MODULES AND VECTOR SPACES                                                  189


Theorem 2.16. Let R,S,T be division rings such that R CI S CI T. Then                                                                                                                                             let i     :   X -> R           Z be given by t(r) = (1/2,1). Prove that R Z is a free module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on *.              [tfi/i/;   given / :*->.4,   let A = B      C as in Exercise 1.17, so that
                                                                  dirndl = (dimsT)(dimRS).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /(/)      = b + c(beB,ce C). Define f(r,m) = rb + mc.)
Furthermore, dirndl is finite if and only if dim sT and dim rS are finite.                                                                                                                                            (c) If    R is an arbitrary ring and* is any set, then there exists a free module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on*. [Hint. Since * is the disjoint union of the sets |r| with t e *, it suffices
      PROOF. Let U be a basis of T over 5, and let Fa basis of S over R. It suffices                                                                                                                              by (a) to assume * has only one element. If R has an identity, use (b). If R
to show that   vu v s V,u e U\ is a basis of Tover R. For the elements vu are all                                                                                                                                 has no identity, embed R in a ring S with identity and characteristic      as in
                        {           |




distinctby the linear independence of U over S. Consequently, we may conclude                                                                                                                                     the proof of Theorem                          III. 1.10.     Use Exercise         1.18 to          show that 5 is a free
that dim^r = |t/||P|= (dimsFXdiniflS). The last statement of the theorem then                                                                                                                                   R -module on*.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3. Let R be any ring (possibly without identity) and F a free ^-module on the set
follows immediately since the product of two finite cardinal numbers is finite and the
product of an infinite with a finite cardinal number is infinite (Introduction, Theorem                                                                                                                          *, with i :*-> F, as in Exercise 2. Show that t(*) is a set of generators of the
8.11).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /^-module F. [Hint: let G be the submodule of F generated by t(*) and use the
                                                     n                                                                                                                                                            definition of "free module" to                             show that there is a module homomorphism <p
      If u e T, then u                      =    X
                                                 i=l
                                                                                  e   s u e u) since u spans T as a vector space over S.
                                                                                        >    <

                                                                                                                                                   "it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  such that

Since 5 is a vector space over R each s{ may be written as s, = 53 r»J r > ( r*> e                                                                                                        £


Thus « = 2j,«, = 2(2ry                                                    t;>rJJw. Therefore,                                                            {z;w|z;        £       Km e              £/}
                    i                            i        j                                      i     7

spans r as a vector space over
                                                n        m
      Suppose
          77i
                            that                £ 2=
                                            t => 1 ;          1
                                                                                            =              ( r»J e          e   F w e u)- For
                                                                                                                                      »   »
                                                                                                                                                                            each    z">           let



* = Z) >W e 5 Then              -                             = 2^                £                           =      2 (S           rav^ui =              X                     The linear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is commutative.                 Conclude that <p = l F .]
independence of U over S implies that for each z,                                                                          = s = 2y r»'^>- Tne ine a r inde-
                                                                                                                                 t                                          l

                                                                                                                                               j
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.   Let Rbta principal ideal domain, A sl unitary left ^-module, and p e R a prime
pendence of V over R implies that rtJ = for all ij. Therefore,                                                                                                vu        v s V,u e (7) is
                                                                                                                                                          {         \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (      irreducible). Let pA                    = {pa        aeA    }   and A[p] =          aeA          pa = 0}
                           and hence a basis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        {
linearly independent over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a)       R/(p) is a field (Theorems III.2.20 and III.3.4).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b)       pA and A[p] are submodules of A.
                                                                                      EXERCISES                                                                                                                       (c)       A/pA is a vector space over R/(p), with (r + (/?))(« + pA) = ra + pA.

                                                                                                                                          V over a division ring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (d) ^[p] is a vector space over R/(p), with (r                                + (/?))« = ra.
 1.   (a)       A set of vectors {x u                                 .   .   .       ,x n   ]       in a vector space                                                                             is

      linearly dependent if and only if some x k                                                                     is   a linear combination of the pre-                                                  5.   Let V be a vector space over a division ring D and 5 the set of all subspaces of V                                      9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 partially ordered by set theoretic inclusion.
      ceding X{.
      (b) If {x u x 2 ,x 3 }                    is       a linearly independent subset of V, then the set {xi                                                  + x2                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a)       5 is a complete lattice (see Introduction, Exercise 7.2; the l.u.b. of VU V2 is
      x 2 + *3, jc 3 + jci} is linearly independent if and                                                                 only if            Char R^2. [See Defini-                                             Vi    + V and the g.l.b. V, D V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                      2 ).


       tion III.l. 8].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b)       S is a complemented lattice; that is, for each V e S there exists V2 eS suchl

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 that V = Vi               + V and V,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2V = 0, so that F = V,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f]    2   F                                        2.
 2.   Let R be any ring (possibly without identity) and   a nonempty set. In this exer-                                     X                                                                                         (c) 5 is a modular lattice; that is, if V V ,V eS and F C V then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U                 u          2   3                    3
      cise an .R-module F is called a free module on X if F is a free object on X in the
      category of all left ^-modules. Thus by Definition 1.7.7, F is the free module on                                                                                                                                                                    Pi   n (f2 + v ) = (v, n v ) + f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3                   2           3.


      X if there is a function i                                      *—
                                     F such that for any left ^-module A and function
                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.   Let R and C be the fields of real and complex numbers respectively.
      f :X-^ A there is a unique /^-module homomorphism f F ^ A with /t = /.                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a)       dim R C = 2 and dim R R = 1.
                  Let {Xi  be a collection of mutually disjoint sets and for each / e /,                                                                                                                                        There is no field K such that
           (a)                          |
                                            /   e /}                                                                                                                                                                  (b)                                                       RCJfCC,
      suppose F is a free module on *;, with i :* — > F Let A' =
                            t
                                                                          and F =                              -
                                                                                                               t      x         t .                           UX
                                                                                                                                                              iel
                                                                                                                                                                        {                         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                  iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                            7.   IfG is a nontrivial group that is not cyclic of order 2, then G has a nonidentity
      F with <£ :Fi-+F the canonical injection. Define
         t ,            t
                                                                                                                                l     :   X — F by i(x) = &i,{.v) for
                                                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 automorphism. [//z>zr: Exercise II.4.11 and Exercise 4(d) above.]
      x e**; (t is well defined since theX are disjoint). Prove that F is a free module on
      X. [Hint: Theorem 1.13 may be useful.]                                                                                                                                                                8.   If   V is a finite dimensional vector space and Vm is the vector space
        (b) Assume R has an identity. Let the abelian group Z be given the trivial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V@V@---@V (wsummands),
      ^-module structure {rm = for all r e R, m e Z), so that R Z is an ^-module
      with r(r',m) = (rr', 0) for all r/ zR,me Z. If                                                                      X is any one element set,* =                                        {   /j             then for each m >                    1,   Vm is finite dimensional and dim Vm = w(dim F).
190                                                             CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                        3.   PROJECTIVE AND INJECTIVE MODULES                          191



    9. If Fi and          F are free modules over a ring with the invariant dimension property,
                            2
                                                                                                                                  with bottom row exact {that is, g an epimorphism), there exists an K-module homo-
         then rank (Fi            F ) = rank Fi + rank F
                                                       2                           2.
                                                                                                                                  morphism h     :   P —* A such that the diagram

10.      Let R be a ring with no zero divisors such that for all r,s s R there exist a,b s R,
          not both zero, with ar                              + bs = 0.                                                                                                        P
            (a) If        R =              #0 L (module              direct sum), then      K=       or L = 0.
            (b) If        R has an identity, then R has the invariant dimension property.
1 1 .    Let F be a free module of infinite rank a over a ring R that has the invariant di-
         mension property. For each cardinal f3 such that      < < a, F has infinitely
                                                                                                                                  is commutative (that is,     gh = f).
         many proper free submodules of rank 0.
12. If      F is a free module over a ring with identity such that F has a basis of finite                                           The theorems below will provide several examples of projective modules. We
          cardinality n > 1 and another basis of cardinality n + 1, then F has a basis of                                         note first that if R has an identity and P is unitary, then P is projective if and only if
         cardinality m for every m > n {m e N*).                                                                                  for every pair of unitary modules A, B and diagram of 7?-module homomorphisms

1   3.   Let A' be a ring with identity and F a free ^-module with an infinite denumerable
         basis e u e 2
                    {
                            Then R = Hom K {F,F) is a ring by Exercise 1.7(b). If n is any
                            ,      .   .   .
                                               I
                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                    P
         positive integer, then the free left 7?-module                     R has a basis of n elements; that is,
         as an /^-module,                                  R = R©- •© R for any finite number of summands.
                                                                     -




         [Hint: [1 R       \       is            /i,/2 is a basis of two elements, where
                                           a basis of one element;             {        )



         /ifen) = e n          ,
                                              and Me 2n -i) = e n Note that for any g s R,
                                   Me2n -i) = 0, f (e2n =        2   )                           .




         £ = ffi/i + £2/2, where gi(e„) = gfe*) and g 2 (e n ) = gfe„-i).]                                                        with g an epimorphism, there exists a homomorphism h   P — A with gh = / For
                                                                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                    '




                                                                                                                                                                                                            >



14.      Let /      :   K— F' be a linear transformation of finite dimensional vector spaces K
                               >
                                                                                                                                  by Exercise 1.17, A = A      Y   @
                                                                                                                                                             A and B = #1
                                                                                                                                                                       2            ©
                                                                                                                                                                               B with A U B unitary and RA =
                                                                                                                                                                                        2               X            2

                                                                                                                                  = RB Exercise 1.17 shows further that f(P) (Z Bi and g A is an epimorphism
         and V such that dim V = dim K'. Then the following conditions are equivalent:
                                                                                                                                        2.                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                            x


                                                                                                                                  Ai—*B U so that we have a diagram of unitary modules:
         (i) /is an isomorphism; (ii) / is an epimorphism; (iii) / is a monomorphism.

         [ffi/i/:       Corollary 2.14.]
                                                                                                                                                                               P
15.      Let /? be a ring with identity. Show that R is not a free module on any set in the
         category of all /^-modules (as defined in Exercise 2). [Hint. Consider a nonzero
         abelian group                         A with the trivial 7?-module structure (ra =                      for all r e R,
                                                                                                                                                                           A^B^O
         a e A). Observe that the only module homomorphism R —* A is the zero map.]

                                                                                                                                  Thus the existence of h :P —> A with gh = / is equivalent to the existence of
                                                                                                                                  h:P-^A with gh = /.
                                                                                                                                             l




3.       PROJECTIVE AND INJECTIVE MODULES
         Every free module is projective and arbitrary projective modules (which need not                                         Theorem 3.2. Every free module F over a ringR with identity is projective.
be free) have some of the same properties as free modules. Projective modules are
especially useful in a categorical setting since they are defined solely in terms of                                                 REMARK. The Theorem is true if the words "with identity" are deleted and F is
modules and homomorphisms. Injectivity, which is also studied here, is the dual                                                   a free module in the category of all left /^-modules (as defined in Exercise 2.2). The
notion to projectivity.                                                                                                           proof below carries over verbatim, provided Exercise 2.2 is used in place of Theo-
                                                                                                                                  rem 2.1 and the word "unitary" deleted.

                                                                                                                                     PROOF OF 3.2. In view of the remarks preceding the theorem we may assume
Definition 3.1.                        A module P over a ring R is said to be projective ifgiven any diagram
                                                                                                                                  that we are given a diagram of homomorphisms of unitary /^-modules:
ofR-module homomorphisms

                                                                           P
                                                                               f
                                                                         A-^B^0
192                                   CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                    3.   PROJECTIVE AND INJECTIVE MODULES                                                   193



with g an epimorphism and F a free i?-module on the set            (t       X
                                                                         -+ F). For each
                                                                                     :   X                         with exact bottom row, consider the diagram

x £ X, f(i(x)) e B. Since g is an epimorphism, there exists a x £ A with g(a x ) =

Since F is free, the map            ^—   >   /4   given   byxh^i induces an i?-module homomor-                                                                      F
phism h\F      A such that /z(i(») = a* for all x eX. Consequently, ghi(x) = g(ax)
= fu(x) for all x e X so that ghi = j\\X-±B. By the uniqueness part of Theorem                                                                                      p
2.1 (iv^ we have gh = f. Therefore F is projective.
                                                                                                                                                                    I'
                                                                                                                                                                A^B^O
Corollary 3.3. Every module A over a ring R is the homomorphic image of a projec-                                  Since F is projective by Theorem 3.2, there is an P-module homomorphism
tive R-module.                                                                                                     hi'.F^A such that gh = fir. Let h = h^i P -> A. Then gh = gh = (fir)L                            x i
                                                                                                                                                   x                          :



                                                                                                                   = fiiri) = f\ P = f Therefore, P is projective.
          PROOF. Immediate from Theorem 3.2 and Corollary 2.2.
                                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. If R = Z  then Z and Z are Z -modules (see Exercise 1.1) and
                                                                                                                                                   6,       3            2        6

                                                                                                                   there is aZ -module isomorphism Z ^ Z ©Z Hence both Z and Z are projec-
                                                                                                                                    6                           6    2       3.                       2         3

Theorem 3.4. Let R be a ring.                      The following conditions on an R-module P are                   tive Z -modules that are not free Z -modules.
                                                                                                                                6                          6

equivalent.

           (i)   P is projective;
          (ii)   every short    exact sequence            0^A^B-^P-+0           is   split        exact   {hence   Proposition 3.5. Let R be a ring. A direct sum ofR-modules ]T] Pi is projective if
B^A              ©   P);                                                                                                                                                                              izl

          (iii) there is a free module F and an R-module K such that F                   ^ K © P.                  and only if each Pi is projective.


          REMARK. The words "free module" in condition (iii) may be interpreted in                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose ]Tp is projective. Since the proof of (iii) => (i)
                                                                                                                                                                     t



the sense of Theorem 2.1 if R has an identity and P is unitary, and in the sense of                                                                   F is projective, it remains valid with ^ Pf
                                                                                                                   in Theorem 3.4 uses only the fact that

Exercise 2.2 otherwise. The proof is the same in either case.
                                                                                                                   /    ,   Pi and Pj in place of F,K, and P respectively. The converse is proved by similar
                                                                                                                   ivy
          PROOF OF 3.4. (i) => (ii) Consider the diagram                                                           techniques using the diagram


                                                            P                                                                                                       Pi

                                                             lr

                                                     #Xp— o                                                                                                         v
                                                                                                                                                               aSb-+o
with bottom row exact by hypothesis. Since P is projective there is an P-module
homomorphism               h.P^B
                         such that gh = I p. Therefore, the short exact sequence
                                                                                                                   If each Pj is projective, then for each j there exists /z,         :   P,   — /4 such that ghj = /t, By
                                                                                                                                                                                                >


                                                                                                                   Theorem 1.13 there is a unique homomorphism h '-^Pi^A with                                             =
0-+A^B<=>P-^0is split exact by Theorem 1.18 and B
                       h
                                                                            =A           @   P.
                                                                                                                   every y. Verify that gh = /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /?,   for


          (ii)   => (iii) By Corollary 2.2 there is a free P-module F and an epimorphism

g     :   F —P. If K = Ker g, then O^A: ^-F-^P^O is exact. By hypothesis the se-                                      Recall that the dual of a concept defined in a category (that is, a concept defined
quence splits so that           F^   K® P by Theorem                1.18.                                          in terms of objects and morphisms), is obtained by "reversing all the arrows."
      (iii) => (i) Let tt be the composition              F^K@P-+P
                                                            where the second map is the                            Pushing this idea a bit further one might say that a monomorphism is the dual of an
 canonical projection. Similarly let t be the composition P — > £       P   F with the   © =                       epimorphism, since A — B is a monomorphism if and only if — A — 5 is exact and     >     >


 first map the canonical injection.      Given a diagram of P-module   homomorphisms                               5 — /4 is an epimorphism if and only if B —* A — (arrows reversed!) is exact. This
                                                                                                                            >                                                 >

                                                                                                                   leads us to define the dual notion of projectivity as follows.

                                                            P

                                                                f                                                  Definition 3.6.       A module J over a ring R is said to be injective ifgiven any diagram
                                                                                                                   of R-module homomorphisms
194                               CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                     3.     PROJECTIVE AND INJECTIVE MODULES                                                                    195



                                                                                                                                                  0-*~L            +R

                                                                                                                                                              J

                                                                                              is commutative. Clearly, such an h always exists if J is injective. Conversely, suppose
with top row exact {that is, g a monomorphism), there exists an K-module homomor-
phism h    :   B —* J such that the diagram                                                   J has the stated extension property and suppose we are given a diagram of module
                                                                                              homomorphisms


                                                                                                                                                  0+A $~B

                                              J                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                              J

is commutative (that is, hg     = f).
                                                                                              with top row exact.             To show that J is injective we must find a homomorphism
                                                                                              h :B — > J with hg = f Let S be the set of all /^-module homomorphisms h                                                     :   C —* J,
      Remarks analogous to those in the paragraph following Definition 3.1 apply here         where     ImgC C C B. S            is   nonempty since fg~                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                   :   Im g —> J is an element of S (g is a
to unitary injective modules over a ring with identity. It is not surprising that the
                                                                                              monomorphism). Partially order S by extension: hi < h 2 if and only if Dom hi C
duals of many (but not all) of the preceding propositions may be readily proved. For
                                                                                              Dom h 2 and h 2 Dom hi = hi. Verify that the hypotheses of Zorn's Lemma are satis-
                                                                                                                 \




example since in a category products are the dual concept of coproducts (direct               fied and conclude that S contains a maximal element h      H—+J with hg = /. We                   :


sums), the dual of Proposition 3.5 is                                                         shall complete the proof by showing H = B.


                                                                                                If H ?± B and b e B - H, then L =       r e R rb e H) is a left ideal of R. The map
                                                                                                                                                      {                \




Proposition 3.7.        A direct product of K-modules YL h is injective if and only ifJy is   L^>J given by r I— h(rb) is a well-defined /^-module homomorphism. By hypothesis
                                                                                              there is an /^-module homomorphism k                        :   R^J such that k(r) = h(rb) for                              all reL.
injective for every i e I.                                                                    Let c = k(l R ) and define a map h              :H + Rb — J by a + rb h h(a) + rc. We claim
                                                                                                                                                                           >


                                                                                              that h is well defined. For if          ai + rib = a + r b
                                                                                                                                                      2   H + Rb, then ai — a = (r — n) b
                                                                                                                                                                   2           s                                     2    2

      PROOF. Exercise; see Proposition 3.5.                                                   £    H D Rb. Hence r — nsL and h(a — h(a
                                                                                                                          2                         = h(a — a ) = h((r2 — ri)b) =
                                                                                                                                                              x)                       2)       Y       2

                                                                                              k (r — r0 = (r — ri)k(\ R ) = (r — r )c. Therefore, h(ai + rib) = h(ai) + nc = h(a )
                                                                                                    2            2                        2       x                                                                                 2

      Since the concept of a free module cannot be dualized (Exercise 13), there are no       + r c = h(a + r b) and h is well defined. Verify that h H + Rb — J is an .R-module
                                                                                                    2        2       2                                                                      :               >


analogues of Theorems 3.2 or 3.4 (iii) for injective modules. However, Corollary 3.3          homomorphism that is an element of the set S. This contradicts the maximality of h
can be dualized. It states, in effect, that for every module A there is a projective          since b $    H and hence H C H + Rb. Therefore, H = B and J                                                       is   injective.
module P and an exact sequence P — > A — > 0. The dual of this statement is that for
every module A there is an injective module J and an exact sequence             — A — J; in
                                                                                 >    >
                                                                                                    An abelian group D is said to be divisible if given any y e D and ^ n e Z, there
other words, every module may be embedded in an injective module. The remainder
of this section, which is not needed in the sequel, is devoted to proving this fact for
                                                                                              exists x e D such that nx = y. For example, the additive group Q is divisible, but Z
                                                                                              is   not (Exercise 4). It is easy to prove that a direct sum of abelian groups is divisible
unitary modules over a ring with identity. Once this has been done the dual of Theo-
                                                                                              if   and only if each summand is divisible and that the homomorphic image of a
rem 3.4 (i), (ii), is easily proved (Proposition 3.13). We begin by characterizing in-
                                                                                              divisible group is divisible (Exercise 7).
jective .R-modules in terms of left ideals (submodules) of the ring R.



                                                                                              Lemma 3.9. An abelian group D is divisible if and only ifT> is an injective (unitary)
Lemma 3.8. Let R be a ring with identity. A unitary K-module J is injective if and            Z-module.
only if for every left ideal Lo/R, any K-module homomorphism L — J may be ex-
                                                                            >


tended to an K-module homomorphism K —* J.                                                          PROOF. If D is injective, y e D and                            ^ n e Z, let /: (n) -> D be the unique
                                                                                              homomorphism determined by n\->y; ((n) is a free Z-module by Theorems 1.3.2
      SKETCH OF PROOF. To say that f :L^J may be extended to R means                          and II. 1.1). Since D is injective, there is a homomorphism h Z —* D such that the                    :



                            R—*J such that the diagram
that there is a homomorphisri h         :                                                     diagram
196                               CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                       3.    PROJECTIVE AND INJECTIVE MODULES                                           197



                                                                                                                  (x e R). Verify that h is a well-defined function (that is, each h(r) is a group homo-
                                                                                                                  morphism R—>J) and                that    /z       is   a group    homomorphism R — Hom z(i?,7).           If
                                                                                                                  j,r,x e i?, then


                                                        D                                                                                       Ksr)(x) = g«5r)) = g({xs)r) = h(r)(xs).

                                                                                                                  By the definition of the ^-module structure of Hom z (R,J), h(r)(xs) = [sh(r)](x),
is commutative. If x = /z(l), then nx = nh(l) = h(n) =            = >>. Therefore, Z) is                          whence h(sr) = sh(r) and h is an R -module homomorphism. Finally suppose r eL
divisible. To prove  the converse   note that the only  left ideals of Z are the cyclic                           and x e R. Then xr e L and
groups (n), n e Z. If D is divisible and / (n) — > Z) is a homomorphism, then there
                                                        :



exists x e D with      = /(«). Define h Z -> D by 1 h> x and verify that /z is a
                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                 «rX*) = Sixr) = g(xr) = [f(xr)](l R ).
homomorphism that extends /. Therefore,                     D is injective by Lemma 3.8.                         Since /is an ^-module homomorphism and                             Hom z (R,J) an i?-module,
      REMARK. A complete characterization of divisible abelian groups (injective                                                         [/(*r)](l*)       = [xf(r)](l R ) = /WO**) = /«(*)•
unitary Z-modules) is given in Exercise 11.                                                                      Therefore, /z(r) = /(r) for r e L and h is an extension of /.


                                                                                                                      We are now able to prove the duals of Corollary 3.3 and Theorem 3.4.
Lemma 3.10. Every abelian group A may be embedded in a divisible abelian group.

      PROOF. By Theorem II. 1.4 there is a free Z-module F and an epimorphism                                    Proposition 3.12. Every unitary module A over a ring R with identity may be em-
F— A with kernel K so that F/K^ A. Since F
      >                                           is a direct sum of copies of Z
                                                                                                                 bedded in an injective R-module.
(Theorem II. 1 .1) and      ZCQ,F   may be embedded in a direct sum D of copies of the
rationals Q   (Theorem     1.8.10).  But D is a divisible group by Proposition 3.7,
                                                                                                                     SKETCH OF PROOF. Since A is an abelian group, there is a divisible group J
Lemma 3.9, and the remarks preceding it. If / F—> D is the embedding monomor-
                                                                 :

                                                                                                                 and a group monomorphism / A —>J by Lemma 3.10. The map / Hom z (R,A)
phism, then /induces an isomorphism F/K                     ^
                                               f(F)/f(K) by Corollary 1.5.8. Thus the
                                                                                                                                                                 :



                                                                                                                 —> Hom z (RJ) given on g e Hom z (R,A) by f(g) = fg e Hom z (R,J) is easily seen to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




composition A        F/K f(F)/f(K) c />//(*) is a monomorphism. But D/f(K) is
                     ^        ^                                                                                  be an /^-module monomorphism. Since every i?-module homomorphism is a
divisible since it is the homomorphic image of a divisible group.
                                                                                                                 Z-module homomorphism, we have Hom#CR,/*)                                 C
                                                                                                                                                                       Hom z (R,A). In fact, it is
                                                                                                                 easy to see that Hom R (R,A) is an .R-submodule of Hom z (i?,/i). Finally, verify
     R is a ring with identity and J is an abelian group, then Hom z CR,/), the set of
      If
                                                                                                                 that the map A — Uom R (R,A) given by a h-> /, where /(r) = ra, is an i?-module
all Z-module homomorphisms        R — J, is an abelian group (Exercise 1 .7). Verify that
                                        >
                                                                                                                 monomorphism (in fact it is an isomorphism). Composing these maps yields an
Hom z (R,J) is a unitary left .R-module with the action of R defined by (rf)(x) = f(xr),
                                                                                                                 /^-module monomorphism
(r,jce*;/e Hom z (i?,7)).
                                                                                                                                        A -> HomtfCM)                      Hom z(R,A) -4 Hom z (R,J).
Lemma 3.11. If J is a divisible abelian group and R is a ring with identity, then                                Since   Hom z CR,y) is an injective i?-module by Lemma 3.11, we have embedded A in
                                                                                                                 an injective.
Hom z (RJ) is an injective left R-module.

      SKETCH OF PROOF. By Lemma 3.S                             it   suffices to       show that for each left
ideal L of R, every ^-module homomorphism /               L — Hom z (/?,y) may be extended
                                                                     :                                           Proposition 3.13. Let R be a ring with identity. The following conditions on a
to an ^-module homomorphism h               :
                                                 —
                                                R Hom z (/?,7). The map g :L->J given by
                                                        >                                                        unitary R-module J are equivalent.

g(a) = [f(a)](l R ) is a group homomorphism. Since J is an injective Z-module by                                       (i)   J is injective;
Lemma '3.9 and we have the diagram
                                                                                                                      (ii)   every short exact sequence                    0->J— B   >      C ->     is   split   exact (hence
                                                                                                                 B^J©C);
                                                                                                                     (iii)   J is a direct summand of any module B of which it is a submodule.

                                                    •j
                                                        j                                                           SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) => (ii) Dualize the proof of (i) =» (ii) of Theorem 3.4.
                                                                                                                          since the sequence 0->7-^5A B/J ->
                                                                                                                 (ii) =* (iii)                                  is split exact, there is a homo-

there      is   a group   homomorphism g :R-+J such that g L = g. Define h R—>     |
                                                                                                        :
                                                                                                                 morphism g'.B/J-* B such that ng = B/J By Theorem 1.18 ((i) => (iii)) there is an
                                                                                                                                                                           \   .




Hom z(R,J) by r h+ /z(r), where /z(r)      ->7 is the map given by [h(r)](x) = g(xr)
                                                :
                                                                                                                 isomorphism J           B/J    ^   2? given by (x,y) (->          * + g(>/). It follows easily that B is the
198                                        CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                           4.   HOM AND DUALITY                                                           199


internal direct sum of / and g(B/J). (iii) => (i) It follows from Proposition 3.12 that /                           7 and 8 to the torsion-free summand so obtained. The other summand                                        D is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t


is a submodule of an injective module Q. Proposition 3.7 and (iii)
                                                                         imply that / is                            direct sum of copies of various Z(p°) by Exercises 7, 10 and H.2.7.]
injective.
                                                                                                           12.      Let G,H,K be divisible abelian groups.
                                                                                                                      (a) If   G          G^H     © H, then G = H               [see Exercise 11].
                                                                                                                      {b)lfG®H9±G®K, then H ^ K [see Exercises 11 and II.2.11.].
                                              EXERCISES
                                                                                                          13. If one attempted to dualize the notion of free module over a ring        R (and called
      Note: R is a ring. If R has an identity, all ^-modules are assumed to be unitary.                             the object so defined "co-free") the definition would read An /^-module F is co-     :



                                                                                                                   free on a set X if there exists a function  F — X such that for any /^-module A
                                                                                                                                                                    i       :           >

 1.   The following conditions on a ring R [with identity] are equivalent:                                         and function / A^>X, there exists a unique module homomorphism f A^>F
                                                                                                                                          :                                                                               :


        (a) Every [unitary] ^-module is projective.                                                                such that if = /(see Theorem 2.1(iv)). Show that for any set X with \X\ > 2 no
         (b)       Every short exact sequence of [unitary] ^-modules is split exact.                               such /^-module F exists. If \X\ = 1, then   is the only co-free module. [Hint: If
         (c)       Every [unitary] i?-module is injective.                                                         F exists and \X\ > 2, arrive at a contradiction by considering possible images of
                                                                                                                      and constructing f :R-+X such that i/V / for every homomorphism
 2.   Let R be a ring with identity. An /^-module A is injective if and only if for every
      left ideal L of R and ^-module homomorphism g      L —> A, there exists a e A such
                                                                      :
                                                                                                                   f:R^F.]
      that g(r) = ra for every r e L.                                                                     14. If      D is a ring with identity such that every unitary Z)-module is free, then D is a
                                                                                                                   division ring. [Hint: it suffices by Exercise III. 2. 7 and Theorem III.2.18 to show
 3.   Every vector space over a division ring D is both a projective and an injective
      Z)-module. [See Exercise 1.]
                                                                                                                   that   D has no nonzero maximal left ideals. Note that every left ideal of D is a
                                                                                                                   free   Z)-module and hence a (module) direct summand of D by Theorem 3.2,
 4. (a)   For each prime p,Z(p°) (see Exercise 1. 1.10) is a divisible group.                                      Exercise 1, and Proposition 3.13.]
      (b) No nonzero finite abelian group is divisible.
      (c) No nonzero free abelian group is divisible.
      (d)     Q    is   a divisible abelian group.

 5.   Q is not a projective Z-module.                                                                     4.       HOM AND DUALITY
 6.   If G is an abelian group, then G =                       D®N,
                                                     with D divisible and    reduced            N                  We first discuss the behavior of Hom#04,Z?) with respect to induced maps, exact
                                                                                                          sequences, direct sums, and direct products. The last part of the section, which is
      (meaning that Nhas no nontrivial divisible subgroups). [Hint: Let D be the sub-
                                                                                                          essentially independent of the first part, deals with duality.
      group generated by the set theoretic union of all divisible subgroups of G\]
                                                                                                                   Recall that if A and B are modules over a ring R, then Hom#(,4,Z?) is the set of all
 7.   Without using Lemma 3.9 prove that:                                                                 /^-module homomorphisms /             A — B. If R = Z we shall usually write Hom(A,B) in
                                                                                                                                                    :        >


        (a) Every homomorphic image of a divisible abelian group is divisible.                            place of        Hom z (^,5). Hom R (A,B) is an abelian group under addition and this addi-
        (b) Every direct summand (Exercise 1.8.12) of a divisible abelian group is                        tion is distributive with respect to composition of functions (see p. 174).
      divisible.
         (c)       A direct sum of divisible abelian groups is divisible.
 8.   Every torsion-free divisible abelian group D is a direct sum of copies of the ra-                   Theorem 4.1. Let A,B,C,D be modules over a ring R and<p C — A andyp B — D              :               >    :            >


      tional Q, [Hint: if    ^ n e Z and a e D, then there exists a unique b s D such                     R-module homomorphisms. Then the map 6 /fowR(A,B) — Homn(C,T>) given by
                                                                                                                                                                        :                            >


      thatA?6 = a. Denoted by (\/n)a. For nu n £ Z (n                 ^ 0), define (m/n)a = m{\/n)a.      f h* \f/f<p is a homomorphism of abelian groups.

      Then D is a vector space over Q. Use Theorem 2.4.]
                                                                                                             SKETCH OF PROOF. 6 is well defined since composition of ^-module homo-
 9.   (a)    D is an abelian group with torsion subgroup D h then D/D is torsion free,
              If                                                                          t

                                                                                                          morphisms is an i?-module homomorphism. 6 is a homomorphism since such com-
      (b) If D is divisible, then so is D whence D = D   t ,                      ©
                                                               £, with £ torsion free.
                                                                          t
                                                                                                          position of homomorphisms is distributive with respect to addition.

10.   Let /? be a prime and Z) a divisible abelian /?-group. Then Z) is a direct sum of
      copies of Z(/°). [7///if; let J be a basis of the vector space D[p] over ZP (see                       The map 6 of Theorem 4.1 is usually denoted Hom(v?,i^) and called the homomor-
      Exercise 2.4). If x eX, then there exists *i,* 2 ,*3,     £ £> such that xi = x,
                                                                              .   .   .                   phism induced by <p and yp. Observe that for homomorphisms <pi      > C, <p 2 C —> A,              :   £—   :




       \xi\   = p, px = xi, px = a-2,
                            2          z         .   .,px n+ = *„,.... If //* is the subgroup
                                                     .          i                                         &    :     -> Z), ^2     :   Z> -> F,

      generated by the x u then //*          ^   Z(/?°°) by Exercise 1.3.7. Show that         D^JL   H^
                                                                                                 xeX                 Hom(^i,^) Hom(^ 2 ,iAi) = Hom^^i,^])                           :   Hom R (A,B) —> Hom R (E,F).
11. Every divisible abelian group is a direct sum of copies of the rationals Q and                           There are two important special cases of the induced homomorphism. If B = D
    copies of Z(/>°° ) for various primes p. [Hint: apply Exercise 9 to D and Exercises                   and ^ = 1/?, then the induced map Hom(v?,l B ) Hom R (A,B) — > Hom R (C,B) is given
                                                                                                                                                                                :
200                                               CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                  4.       HOM AND DUALITY                                                   201



by /h> f<P and is denoted <p. Similarly if A = C and <p = l A the induced-map                                                    by considering D = B/lm 6 and the canonical epimorphism B—*D. Finally, if
Hom(U,^) Hom R (A,B) -> Hom*04,Z)) is given by /h> f/and is denoted if.
                         :
                                                                                                                                 D = C, then                = 0f(l c) = f 0, whence Im                   CZ Ker f Therefore, ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                   £      C ->
   We now examine the behavior of Hom^ with respect to exact sequences.                                                          is exact.



                                                                                                                                       One sometimes summarizes the two preceding results by saying that Hom^,/?)
Theorem 4.2. Let Rbea ring.                             — A
                                                         >        B           C /j an exact sequence ofR-modules if              is left exact. It is not true in general that a short exact sequence                  0—      >£—>C—>0
and only if for every R-module D                                                                                                 induces a short exact sequence                                — Hom R (D,A) — Hom^Z),^) — Homij(Z),C) —
                                                                                                                                                                                                >              >                           >                      >


                                                                                                                                 (and similarly in the first variable; see Exercise 3). However, the next three theorems
                                   -> Hom R (D,A) ±+ Hom R (D,B)                        ^ Hom R (D,C)                            show that this result does hold in several cases.
is an         exact sequence of abelian groups.

                                                                                                                                 Proposition 4.4. The following conditions on modules over a ring R are equivalent.
             PROOF. IfO—>/lAfl-^Cis exact we must prove: (i) Ker <p =                                       (that is, <p is a
monomorphism); (ii) Im <p C Ker if; and (iii) Ker $ CZ Im <p. (i) /e Ker <p=* <pf                                                           (i)   0->A^B^C->0                         is   a split exact sequence ofR~modules;
= => <^/(jc) = for all jc s D. Since —> ^     B is exact, ^ is a monomorphism,A                                                            (ii)        -> Homn(D A) A //owr(D,B) ^ Hom R (D,C) ->
                                                                                                                                                                      9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is   a   split       exact se-
whence /(*) =       for all xeD and / = 0. Therefore,- Ker_£ = 0. (ii) Since                                                     quence of abelian groups for every R-module D;
Im <p = Ker \p by exactness, we have \p<p = and hence $ <p =       = 0. Therefore,                    ^                                (iii)           -> Hom R (C£>)     ^ Hom R (B,D) A Hom R(A,D) -+                               is   a   split       exact se-
Im ^ CZ Ker     (iii) g e Ker ^=>^g = 0=>ImgCZ Ker \p = Im ip. Since           is a                                  <£>

                                                                                                                                 quence of abelian groups for every R-module D.
monomorphism, <p ^ —> Im <p is an isomorphism. If /z is the composite D-^lmg CZ
                                   :




Im             ^   /I,       then /z e Hom (Z),^) and g = <ph = <p(h). Therefore, Ker \p
                                            ij:
                                                                                                                 C Im      <p.
                                                                                                                                       SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) =» (iii) By Theorem 1.18 there is a homomorphism
                                                                                                                                 a B —> A such that a<p = 1 A
                                                                                                                                   :                                              .    Verify that the induced-homomorphism
    Conversely, assume that the Horn sequence of induced maps is exact for every D.
First let D = Ker <p and let / D — > A be the inclusion map. Since Ker <p =
                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                          a   :   Hom^,/)) -> Hom^S.D)
(exactness) and ^(/) = <pi = 0, we must have / = 0, which implies that = D = Ker<p.                                              is such that ipa = lHom/ju.D). Consequently, ^ is an epimorphism (Introduction,

Therefore,    -> /4 A 5 is exact. Next let D = A. Since Ker \p = Im £ we have                                                    Theorem 3.1) and the Hom R sequence is split exact by Proposition 4.3 and Theorem
  = i/^O^O = ^<P^a = ^<p, whence Im <p CZ Ker ^. Finally let Z) = Ker \p and let                                                 1.18. (iii) =» (i) If           D = A and / B — A is such that
                                                                                                                                                                                           :                       1   A       = <p(f) = ftp, then <p is a
y D — Z? be the inclusion map. Since
     :         >                           = 1/7 = ^(/) and Ker if = Im     we have                                              monomorphism (Introduction, Theorem 3.1) and 0->/l A5^C->0 is split
y = jp(f) = <^/for some f:D-+A. Therefore, for every * e Z) = Ker if, * = j(x)                                                                         and Theorem 1.18. The other implications are proved
                                                                                                                                 exact by Proposition 4.3
 = <pf(x) s Im <p and Ker ^ C Im v?. Thus Ker = Im <p and 0—>,4-^Z?-^Cis          \f/
                                                                                                                                 similarly.

exact.


                                                                                                                                 Theorem 4.5. The following conditions on a module P over a ring R are equivalent
Proposition 4.3. Let R be a ring. A-^B-^C^Oisan exact sequence ofR-mod-                                                                    (i)    P is projective;
ules if and only if for every R-module                        D                                                                            (ii)   if\p   :B-+Cis any R-module epimorphism then \p                          :   ZZo/?2r(P,B)    — ZZo/wr(P,C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >


                                                                                                                                 is an      epimorphism of abelian groups;
                                       — Hom R (C£>) ±> Hom R(B,D)                        Hom R (A,D)                              (iii) //0—>A-^B-^»C—>0 is any short exact sequence of R-modules, then


is an         exact sequence of abelian groups.                                                                                   — Hom R (P,A) A Hom R (P,B) Hom R (P,C) — « a« ^xac/ sequence of abelian
                                                                                                                                       >                                                                   >


                                                                                                                                 groups.
    SKETCH OF PROOF. If A                                \b
                                                     is exact, we shall show that
Ker CZ Im J. If fe Ker 0, then = 0(/) = fd, whence = /(Im 0) =_/(Ker f). By                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) <=> (ii)               The map # Hom^P,^) -> Hom,e(P,C)    :




Theorem 1.7 /induces a homomorphism / B/Ker f — D such that /(6 + Ker f)  :
                                                                                                                                 (given by g             H ^g)   an epimorphism if and only if for every /^-module homomor-
                                                                                                                                                                 is

 = /(&). By Theorem 1.7 again there is an isomorphism <p B/Ker f        C such that            :           ^                     phism /           :   P —> C, there is an /^-module homomorphism g P —> B such that the          :




<?(£ + Ker f ) = f (Z>). Then the map f<p~ :C
                                          l
                                                 Z) is an ^-module homomorphism                                                  diagram
such that f(7V -1 ) = / Hence Ker CZ Im f The remainder of this half of the proof
                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
is analogous to that of Theorem 4.2.

    Conversely if the Horn sequence is exact for every D, let D = C/Im f and let
?r  C -» D be the canonical projection. Then f (tt) =
         :
                                                           = and Ker f = imply
7T       = 0, whence C = Im f and 5 ^ C                           is exact. Similarly,             show that Ker f C Im
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > >




202                                                          CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                            4.   HOM AND DUALITY                                       203


iscommutative (that is, f = tg = $(g)). (ii) =» (iii) Theorem 4.2. (iii) ==> (ii) Given                                                                                     EXAMPLES. Every ring R has associative multiplication and hence is an R-R
an epimorphism \p 5 —» C let ^ = Ker ^ and apply (iii) to the short exact sequence
                                       :                                                                                                                                 bimodule. Every left module A over a commutative ring R is an R-R bimodule
0-^A^B^C-^O.                                                                                                                                                             with ra = ar (a e A, r s R).




                                                                                                                                                                         Theorem 4.8. Let R and S be rings and let R A, R B S rC s rD be (bi)modules as in-
Proposition 4.6.                       77ze following conditions on a module J ewe/* (2 r/"/2g                                                   R are equivalent.       dicated.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       ,




           (i)    J /$ injective;                                                                                                                                                   (i)   Homii(A,B) is a right S-module, with the action ofS given by (fs)(a) = (f(a))s
           (ii)   z/0 :A    —» B w <z«y R-module monomorphism, then 6 :HomR(B,J) —» //oawr(A,J)                                                                          (seS;asA;f£//0w R (A,B)).
w           epimorphism of abelian groups;                                                                                                                                        (ii) // ^ A — A' is a homomorphism of left R-modules, then the induced map
                                                                                                                                                                                                  :       >

       (iii)      //0->A-^BiC->0 /s                                                 <zaz>>   s/zo/*/       exac/ sequence of R-modules, then                             ip   :   Hom R (A',B) — Hom R (A,B) is a homomorphism of right S-modules.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         *

     — //owr(C,J) i //owr(B,J)
       >                                                                   Homn(A,J) —                          w aw exac/ sequence of abelian                              (iii) Hom R (C,D) is a left S-module, with the action
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ofS given by (sg)(c) = g(cs)
groups.                                                                                                                                                                  (seS; ceC; g e Hom R (C,D)).
                                                                                                                                                                           (iv) Ift    D — D' is a homomorphism of left R-modules, then \p Hom R (C,D) —
                                                                                                                                                                                              :          >                                                               :



                                                                                                                                                                         Hom R (C,D') is a homomorphism of left S-modules.
       PROOF. The proof is dual to that of Theorem 4.5 and is left as an exercise.
                                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) The verification that fs is a well-defined module
                                                                                                                                                                         homomorphism and that Hom R (A,B) is actually a right S-module is tedious but
Theorem 4.7. Let A,B,                                   Ai       |
                                                                     i   e I)       and {Bj           j e Jj         be modules over a ring R. Then                      straight-forward; similarly for (iii).                   (ii)   ip   is   an abelian group homomorphism by
                                                    I                                             |




there are isomorphisms of abelian groups:                                                                                                                                Theorem 4.1. If f e Hom R (A\B), as A and s e S, then

           (i)    Hom&CE, Ai>B) ^ II /fowR(Ai,B);                                                                                                                                    p(fs)(a) = ((fs)<p)(a)             = (fs)(<p(a)) = (f(<p(a)))s = (fy(a))s = ((<pf)(a))s.
                            ieJ                          iel

       (ii)       tfam R (A, II Bj)                S II «wwr(A,Bj).                                                                                                      Hence ip(fs) = {Jpf)s and Tp is a right S-module homomorphism. (iv) is proved an-
                                                                                                                                                                         alogously.


       REMARKS. If / and J are finite, then J2 A = II ^ and
                                                                                                iel
                                                                                                           <

                                                                                                                         iel
                                                                                                                                           £
                                                                                                                                           ie7
                                                                                                                                                 *i = II 5 i- If 7
                                                                                                                                                       je«/
                                                                                                                                                                           REMARK. An important special case of Theorem 4.8 occurs when R is
                                                                                                                                                                         commutative and hence every 7?-module       C is an R-R bimodule with rc = cr
and J are infinite, however, the theorem may be false if the direct product                                                                                H   is re-
                                                                                                                                                                        (reR,ce C). In this case for every r e R, a e A, and /s Hom R (A,B) we have
placed by the direct sum      (see Exercise 10).   ^                                                                                                                                                                = f(ar) = f(ra) = rf(a) = (f(a))r = (fr)(a).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (rf)(a)

       SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.7. (i) For each                                                                          /   s / let        a :A {   ^J2 A be the
                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                        It        follows    that       Hom R (A,B) is an R-R bimodule with rf = fr for all r e R,
canonical injection (Theorem 1.11). Given {#,-)                                                            eU Hom R Ai,B), there
                                                                                                                               (                      is   a unique     fe Hom R (A,B).
                                                                                                               iel

R -module homomorphism g                                     :
                                                                     ^
                                                                     iel
                                                                           Ai —» B such that gi; = g{ for every / s / (Theorem
                                                                                :




                  map ^ JJ Hom R (A u B) -> Hom^XX^) given by {#}
1.13). Verify that the                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                        Theorem 4.9. If A is a unitary left module over a ring R with identity then there is
is a homomorphism. Show that the map <p    Hom R (%2 A B) — Hom R (Ai,B),                              :                           i9        >                          an isomorphism of left R-modules A     Hom R {R,A).      ^
gfven by                {          ,       is a   homomorphism such that (pxp and                                              ^        are the respective iden-
tity       maps. Thus             (p       is   an isomorphism, (ii) is proved similarly with Theorem 1.12
                                                                                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Since R is an R-R bimodule, the left module structure
in place of Theorem 1.13.
                                                                                                                                                                        of \iom R {R,A)is given by Theorem 4.8(iii). Verify that the map      Hom R (R,A)                <p   :


                                                                                                                                                                          A given by fh>f(l R is an ^-module homomorphism. Define a map \p A —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    )                                                             :

       In order to deal with duality and other concepts we need to consider possible                                                                                    Hom R (R,A) by a\-+fa where f(r) = ra. Verify that \p is a well-defined 7?-module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,

module structures on the abelian group Hom R (A,B). We begin with some remarks                                                                                          homomorphism such that <p\p = l A and \p<p = lH 0mRiRtA)                             .       m
about bimodules. Let R and S be rings. An abelian group A is an R-S bimodule
provided that A is both a left /^-module and a right S-module and                                                                                                             Let A be a left module over a ring R. Since R is an R-R bimodule, Hom (A,R)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                            r(as)       = (ra)s                     for all      a e A, r s R, s s S.                                                   is   a right /^-module by Theorem 4.8(i). Hom R (A,R) is called the dual module of A
                                                                                                                                                                        and is denoted A*. The elements of A* are sometimes called linear functionals.
We sometimes write R A S to indicate the fact that A is an R-S bimodule. Similarly                                                                                      Similarly if B is a right ^-module, then the dual 5* of B is the left ^-module
R B indicates a left /^-module B and C s a right S-module C.                                                                                                            Hom R (B,R) (Exercise 4(a)).
                                                                     f                                                                                             .




204                                                                           CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                        4.       HOM AND DUALITY                                                                                      205


Theorem 4.10. Let A,B and C be left modules over a ring R.
           (i) // ^  A —* C is a homomorphism of left R-modules, then the induced map
                          :




<p   :   C* = HomR(C,R) — //owr(A,R) = A* is a homomorphism of right R-modules.
                                                                 >                                                                                                                                             =                                ri(xi,fi)st                      =   £ 1l                                =            £   nsi
          (ii) There is an R-module isomorphism (A   C)* = A*     C*.                                                                                                                                                   *           J                                                 i            j                                  i



         (iii) IfR is a division ring and 0-+A-^>B-^>C-+0 is a short exact sequence of
                                                                                                                                                                                                               =   Z    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                riixij) =                                (£ r,x f) = («,/).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iy




left      vector spaces, then 0-+C*-^B*^->A*-+0 is a short exact sequence of right
                                                                                                                                                                                  Therefore,   /= flSl + f s + + fs n and f =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2       2           •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {        \             {   fx x eX] generates F*. Hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \


vector spaces.
                                                                                                                                                                                  {   fx x £ X\ is a basis and F* is free.
                                                                                                                                                                                        |




         PROOF. Exercise; see Theorems 2.4, 3.2, 4.1, 4.5, and 4.7. The map ^ of (i) is                                                                                                The process of forming duals may be repeated. If A is a left i?-module, then A* is
called the dual map of <p.
                                                                                                                                                                                  a right /^-module and A** = (A*)* =     Hom R (Hom R ( A, R),R) (where the left hand
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hom R indicates all right /^-module homomorphisms) is a left ^-module (see Exercise
         If A is a left module over a ring R,ae A, and fe A*                                                                               = Hom R (A,R), then one fre-           4(a)). A** is called the double dual of A.
quently denotes                         f(a)eR by (a,f). Since / is a left .R-module homomorphism,
                      (ritfi        + r a ,f) = ri(a uf) + r (a ,f)
                                                    2    2                                               2   2                    (n e R,fe A*, Qi £ A).                   (1)

Similarly since A* is a right .R-module with (fr)(a) = f(a)r, we have                                                                                                            Theorem 4.12. Let A be a left module over a ring R.

                          (a,fm                 + fr             2)       = (a,f)n + (a ,/ >                 2        2       (n e R, f e A *, a e A).                     (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                        (i)    There is an R-module homomorphism                                                                       :   A — A**.  >

                                                                                                                                                                                       (ii)  IfR has an identity and A is free, then is a monomorphism.
         In the proofs below we shall use the brackets notation for linear functional as                                                                                               (iii) IfR has an identity and A is free with a finite basis, then is an isomorphism.
well as the Kronecker delta notation: for any index set / and ring R with identity the
symbol 5 7J (ij e I) denotes                                                  e   R if ^ j and
                                                                                             /                    \   R e R if / = j.                                                  A module A such that                                 :       A—                           is   an isomorphism is said to be reflexive.


                                                                                                                                                                                      PROOF OF 4.12. (i) For each a e A let 6(a)     A* -* R be the map defined by                                           :



Theorem 4.11. Let ¥ be a free left module over a ring R with identity. Let X be a                                                                                                       = (a,f) £ R. Statement (2) after Theorem 4.10 shows that 6(a) is a homo-
                                                                                                                                                                                 [0(a)](/)
basis ofF and for each x e X let fx F — R be given by fx (y) = xy (y £ X). Then                  :       >                                            <5                         morphism of right .R-modules (that is, 6(a) e A**). The map 6 A -* A** given by                                                                              :



                                                                                                                                                                                 a h> 6(a) is a left i?-module homomorphism by (1) after Theorem 4.10.
          (i)   {fx   |
                          x e   X       j       is a         linearly independent subset of¥*of cardinality |X|;
         (ii)   ifX is finite, then F* is a free right R-module with basis {fx x £ X}                                                                      |




                                                                                                                                                                                      (ii)    Let ^be a basis of A.lfae A, then a = nxi + r x 2 H                                                                    2                        h r n x n (r< £ R; x{ eX).
                                                                                                                                                                                 If 6(a)      = 0, then for all fe A*,
    REMARKS. The homomorphisms fx are well defined since F is free with basis X
(Theorem 2.1). In part (ii), {fx \xeX\ is called the dual basis to X. This theorem is
clearly true for any vector space Kover a division ring by Theorem 2.4. In particular,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = <">/> = (£™>f) =                                                                           Z '*W>-
if V is finite dimensional, then Proposition 2.9 and Theorem 4.1 1 imply that dim V

= dim V* and V                          =
                       V*. However, if Kis infinite dimensional then dim V* > dim V
                                                                                                                                                                                 In particular, for          /= f (j = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X]                                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,   n\
(Exercise 12). More generally, if F is a free module over an arbitrary ring (for ex-
ample, Z), F* need not be free (see Exercise 10).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =       Z       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =    £    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rA- y = r y            .




         PROOF OF 4.11. (i) If fx r +fx j2 + ... + fxJn =                           x
                                                                                                                                                 (n e R; x { eX), then for
                                                                                                                                                                                 Therefore, a =          £
                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =       £ 0x = and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t                             6 is a monomorphism.

each j = 0,1,2,                 .   .       .
                                                ,
                                                        n,
                                                                                                                                                                                      (iii)   If A" is a finite basis of A, then ^* is free on the (finite) dual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     basis fx x e X]                                                                                     {    |




                                                                                                                                                                                 by Theorem 4.11. Similarly A ** is free on the (finite) dual basis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 gx x e X] where for
                              = (x 0) = \x,^fxi rS =
                                            j9
                                                                          \       i=l                /
                                                                                                             £    i
                                                                                                                          (xj,fxi )ri =          £
                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                     &,r»' = r ^                 each xel, gx A*     :     R is the homomorphism that is uniquely determined by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {       |       ,




                                                                                                                                                                                 condition: gx (fv ) = 8 xy (yeX). But 0(a) e ^** is a homomorphism /4* -> R such that
Since r i =                   for all j,                     {        x   \
                                                                              x eX]          is      linearly independent. If x                        ^ y eX, then fx (x)       for every y e     X
= 1^0 = fv (x), whence fx                                                           fv   .       Therefore, \X\               =       \{   fx x t-X}\.
                                                                                                                                             \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0M(fv) = (xjv ) = 8 XV = fo (/ ).                                                            tf




         (ii)   If   X is finite, say X = \x u ...,x n
                                                and fe F*, let Si = f( Xt) = (x ,f) e R                      \,                                                        l         Hence gx = d(x) and \0(x) xeX] is a basis of A**. This implies that Im
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              = A**,
and denote fXj by f. If u e F, then u = /vvi + r 2 x 2 + + rn x n £ F for some r, £ R and                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                 whence is an epimorphism.
                                                                            .                                                                                                                    ,.




206                                                                                         CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                          5.        TENSOR PRODUCTS                                    207


                                                                                                 EXERCISES                                                                                                         is commutative,where d A fi are as in Theorem 4.1 2 and /* is the map induced on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A** = Hom R (Hom R (A,R),R) by the map / Hom R (B,R) -> Hom^,/?).
      Note: R is a ring.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :




                                                                                                                                                                                                           10.     Let F = XI Za b e a free Z-module with an infinite basis X. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x e X)
 1.   (a)               For any abelian group A and                                                                positive   integer        /??,   Hom(Zm ,A) = A[m]                                                                                                               \fx                    \




       =            I
                        a e A     |
                                          ma =                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Theorem 4.11) does not form a basis of F*. [Hint: by Theorems 4.7 and 4.9,
      (b)               Hom(Z„„Z )                     ri       ^Z              (nitT)) .                                                                                                                          F*^U            Z.y; but    under this isomorphism fy \-^ \8 xy x\ e JJ Za:.]
      (c) The Z-module Zw hasZw * = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Afore; F*       = JJZv is not a free Z-module; see L. Fuchs [13; p. 168].
      (d) For each/: > 1, Zm is a Z^-module (Exercise 1.1); asaZ™;t-module,Zm *                                                                                                      =Zm          .



                                                                                                                                                                                                           11.     If    R has an identity and Pisa finitely generated projective unitary left 7?-module,
 2.   If A,B are abelian groups and m,n integers such that                                                                             mA =                 =                    then every                        then
      element of Hom(A,B) has order dividing (m,n).                                                                                                                                                                      (a)   P* is a finitely generated projective right 7?-module.
 3.   Let 7r              :   Z —>Z be the canonical epimorphism. The induced map
                                                   2                                                                                                            tt       :   Hom(Z ,Z)   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b)   P is reflexive.
      — Hom(Z ,Z«) is the zero map. Since Hom(Z ,Z ) 7^
            >                         2                                                                                   2   2         (Exercise 1(b)), 7r is not an                                              This proposition may be false if the words "finitely generated" are omitted; see

      epimorphism.                                                                                                                                                                                                 Exercise 10.


 4.   Let R,S be rings and A R S B R S CR D R (bi)modules as indicated. Let Hom R de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           12.     Let F be a field,         X an infinite set, and V the free left F-module (vector space) on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the set X. Let F x be the set of all functions,
                                                                                        ,        ,             ,



      note all right /^-module homomorphisms.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f :X^>F.
                (a) Hom R (A,B) is a left S-module, with the action of S given by (sf)(a) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fx is a (right) vector space over F (with (/+ g)(x) = f(x) + g(x) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (a)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (fr)(x) = rf(x%
      s(f(a)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) There is a vector-space isomorphism V* ^ Fx
         (b) If <p A —   is an homomorphism of right /^-modules, then the induced
                                          :                 >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




      map <p Hom R (A\B) — Hom 7e(^,B) is an homomorphism at left S-modules.
                              :                                                     >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (c) dim   Fx = |F|' A (see Introduction, Exercise 8.10).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   'i



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (d) dim,. V* > dinv V [Hint: by Introduction, Exercise 8.10 and Introduc-
         (c) Hom«(C,D) is a right 5-module, with the action of S given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tion, Theorem 8.5 dim*- V* = dim Fx = \F\ lx > 2 |X| = \P(X)\ > \X\ = dim V.]
      (gs)(c) = g(sc).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7,                      F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^




         (d) If yp D — D'    is an homomorphism of right jR-modules, then
                                              :                 >


      i/' Horrid (C,D) — Hom^C,^') is an homomorphism of right 5-modules.
                :                                                   >




 5.   Let R be a ring with identity; then there is a ring isomorphism Hom R (R,R)                                                                                                    =                 5.          TENSOR PRODUCTS
      where Hom^ denotes left P-module homomorphisms (see Exercises III. 1.1 7 and                                                                                                                         The tensor product A (x) R B of modules A I{ and R B over a ring R is a certain
      1.7). In particular, if R is commutative, then there is a ring isomorphism                                                                                                                       abelian group, which plays an important role in the study of multilinear algebra. It is
      Hom^P,/?) ^ R.                                                                                                                                                                                   frequently useful to view the tensor product A (x) R B as a universal object in a certain
                                                                                                                                                                                                       category (Theorem 5.2). On the other hand, it is also convenient to think of A (x) B
 6.   Let 5 be a nonempty subset of a vector space V over a division ring. The annihila-                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fi


      tor of 5 is the subset 5° of V* given by 5° =    /e V* (s,f) =      for all s e 5|                                      {          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                       as a sort of dual notion to                 Hom R (A,B). We shall do this and consider such topics as
                                  = K*; K° = 0; 5 ^                                                           =^5° ^ K*.                                                                               induced maps and module structures for A (x) R B as well as the behavior of tensor
                (a) 0°                                                                           {   0}
                (b) If W a subspace of V, thenis                                                                      is a subspace of K*.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       products with respect to exact sequences and direct sums.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          If A R and R B are modules over a ring R, and
                (c) If W a subspace of V and dim K
                                          is                                                                         is finite, then W = dim V — dim W.
                                                                                                                                       dim          Q                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is an (additive) abelian group, then

                (d) Let                                     be as in (c). There is                                 an isomorphism IV* = V*/W                             Q
                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a middle linear map from A                    X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B to C is a function / A       B -> such that for all  :    X   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a,a e A, b,b £ B, and r e R:
                (e)       Let                               be as in (c) and identify K with F** under the isomorphism 6 of                                                                                    l               x




      Theorem 4.12. Then                                                                     = W CZ K**.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    + « ,W = /(*!,/>) + /( ,6);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                              fl2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (3)
 7. If K is a vector space over a division ring and / e K*, let  # e K                                                                          =       {            |
                                                                                                                                                                             (#,/) =         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /("A +    =          + f{aM)\                                  (4)
    then ^ is a subspace of V. If dim V is finite, what is dim W?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /(flr,«     - /(o,r^).                                  (5)
 8.   If #               has an identity and we denote the left P-module R by R R and the right
                                                                                                                                                                                                         For fixed A lUR B consider the category m(A,B) whose objects are all middle linear
      R -module R by R R then ( R R)* ^                                 ,                                          and (R R )*    ^                                                                   maps on A X B. By definition a morphism in 3K(A,B) from the middle linear map
 9.   For any homomorphism /                                                                 :   A — 5 of left 7?-modules the diagram
                                                                                                          >                                                                                           f:A X B C to the middle linear map g A X#^Disa group homomorphism      :



                                                                                                                                                                                                      /zC — D such that the diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                           :         >




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                           ®               ®

208                                                      CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                                  5.        TENSOR PRODUCTS                                                                         209


iscommutative. Verify that ^R(A,B) is a category, that \ c is the identity morphism                                                                                                  Given modules A R and R B over a ring R, it is easy to verify that the map
from / to /, and that h is an equivalence in 3fll(/l,i?) if and only if h is an isomorphism                                                                                    i:A X B —> A               ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                 R B given by (a,b) h+ a    b is a middle linear map. The map / is         ®
of groups. In Theorem 5.2 we shall construct a universal object in the category                                                                                                called the canonical middle linear map. Its importance is seen in

W(A,B) (see Definition 1.7.9). First, however, we need

                                                                                                                                                                            Theorem 5.2. Let A R and R B be modules over a ring R, and let C be an abelian group.
Definition 5.1. Let A be a right module and B a left module over a ring R. Let F be                                                                                         Ifg A X B —» C is a middle linear map, then there exists a unique group homomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                        :




                                                                                                                                                                            phism g A (x) R B — C such that gi = g, where
the free abelian group on the set A X B. Let                                            K be the subgroup ofF generated by all                                                                  :                                 A X B A R B is the canonical
                                                                                                                                                                            middle linear map. A (x) R B is uniquely determined up to isomorphism by this property.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ®
elements of the following forms (for all a,a' e A; b,b' e B                                                    ;   r e R):


         (i)   (a  + a',b) - (a,b) - (a',b);
                                                                                                                                                                            In other words \:AXB-^A
                                                                                                                                                                            linear maps on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                               R B is universal in the category 9fTC(A,B) of all middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                          A X B.
      (ii)      (a,b + b')-(a,b)-(a,b');
      (iii)    (ar,b)    — (a,rb).                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Let F be the free abelian group on the set AX B, and
The quotient group F/K is called the tensor product of A andB; it is denoted A (x) R B
                                                                                                                                                                            let     K be the subgroup described in Definition 5.1. Since F is free, the assignment
(or simply          A®
                B //R = Z). The coset (a,b) + Ko/ the element (a,b) in F is denoted                                                                                         (a,b) !— g(a,b) eC determines a unique homomorphism g F—> C by Theorem 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                 Use the fact that g is middle linear to show that gi maps every generator of K to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y   :




a    ®   b; the coset of (0,0) is denoted 0.
                                                                                                                                                                            (iv).

                                                                                                                                                                            0. Hence K cz Ker g      By Theorem 1.7 gi induces a homomorphism g F/K-+ C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :



                                                                                                                                                                            such that                          +       ff]      =                                  - g(a,b).   But            F/X =                     and                   +X
      Since F is generated by the set A X B, the quotient group F/K = A                                                                                     ® B
                                                                                                                                                              R       is
                                                                                                                                                                            = a® b. Therefore, g ^ (x)                is a homomorphism such that gi(a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a,b)

generated by all elements (cosets) of the form                                  a® b (a A, b B). But not true
                                                                                                           e                     e                  it is
                                                                                                                                                                            = g(a           ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :             fl



that every element of A                          ® B               of the form a® b (Exercise For the typical ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                    b) = g(a,b) for all (a,b) e A X B; that is, gi = g. If h A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RB  C is any                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ®
                                    T
                                                     R        is                                                             4).
                                                                                                                                                                            homomorphism with hi = g, then for any generator a® b of           R B,                                                             A®
ment of F is a sum
                                i   =i
                                         ni(a { ,bi) (ni eZ, a { e A, bi e B) and hence                                              its   coset in A         ® B R                                       h(a          ®       b)   = hi(a,b) = g(a,b) = gi(a,b) = g(a                                     ®    b).
                                                 r

= F/K is of the form                         ^
                                             i   =i
                                                      nfai         ®   bd. Furthermore, since                           it       is   possible to choose
                                                                                                                                                                            Since // and g are homomorphisms that agree on the generators of A
                                                                                                                                                                           have h - g, whence g is unique. This proves that i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A XB    A (g) R B is a universal                              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (g) R B, we must


different representatives for a coset, one may have a                                                ®b =               a' (x) b' in
                                                                                                                             '

                                                                                                                                                A     ®     R B, but       object in the category of all middle linear maps on A X B, whence A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R B is                                                                          ®
a 9^ a! and b ^ b' (Exercise 4). It is also possible to have A                                                          ® B=     R              even though                uniquely determined up to isomorphism (equivalence) by Theorem 1.7.10.
A ^            and £ ^          (Exercise 3).


      Definition 5.1 implies that the generators a                                          ® 6 of ^               (x) fi        5 satisfy the follow-                     Corollary 5.3. //  R A R ', R B and R B' are modules over a ring R andf A —> A',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                                                                                                          :


ing relations (for all a,ai e A, b,bi e B, and r e R):                                                                                                                     g  B — B' are R-module homomorphisms, then there is a unique group homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                :           >



                                             (ai      +a      2)   (X) Z>       = 0! (X) £ + fl2 (x) Z>;                                                          (6)
                                                                                                                                                                           A (x) R B -> A' R B'       ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                      that a    b h> f(a)   g(b) /or a// a e A, b e B. ®                       ®
                                                 a (x) (Z>i    + £ = a (x) b + a (x)
                                                                       2)                   x                  Z> 2 ;                                             (7)               SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that the assignment (a,b) f(d) ® g(A) defines
                                                                                                                                                                           a middle linear map h A X B -> C = A' R B'. By Theorem 5.2 there is a unique
                                                              ar®b = a®rb.                                                                                        (8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :



                                                                                                                                                                           homomorphism   A   R B  A'
                                                                                                                                                                           = /(fl)®^)forallae^, Ae5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           h       :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ®                                        R B'   such       that      //(a   ®   b)   = hi(a,b) =
The proof of these facts is straightforward; for example, since (a\ + a 2 ,b) — (ai,b) —
(a 2 ,b) s K, the "zero coset," we have
                                                                                                                                                                                    The unique homomorphism of Corollary 5.3 is denoted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R B-^                                                       f®g:A®
                         {(a,   + a ,b) + K] - [(a u b) + K] - [(a ,b) + K] = K;
                                         2                                                           2                                                                     A'       ® R B'. Iff A R ->: and g' '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ->    are also fl-module homomorphisms,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :



                                                                                                                                                                           then it is easy to verify that
or in the notation (a,b) -\-                          K = a® b,
                                        (a   v    +a     2)®b - a ®b - a ®b =    x              2                       0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (/'   ® g')(f®                      g)   = (/7(g) g'g) :A® R B-^A"                                     ® B".R
                                                                                                                                                                           It follows readily that if                          /and g are /^-module isomorphisms, then f® g is a group
Indeed an alternate definition                            of A ® B         abelian group with genera-
tors all symbols a              ®b
                                                                            R        is that it is

                                                                                             Further-
                                         (a e A, b e B), subject to the relations (6)-(8) above.
                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                           isomorphism with inverse / _1                                     ® g~          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .




more, since             is   the only element of a group satisfying x                                              + x = x,                 it is    easy to see
that for all as A, be B:
                                                                                                                                                                           Proposition 5.4. If A -> B i C                                                           is an exact sequence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of left modules over a ring
                                                     a®0 = 0(g) b = 0®0 = 0.                                                                                               R and D is a right R-module, then
210                                                     CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                             5.   TENSOR PRODUCTS                                              211


                                             D(X) R   A^D® B-^D(x) C-,0                R                                         R                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) For each s e S the map A X B ^ A ® R B given by
                                                                                                                                                                                         (a,b) h> sa            ®b   is   Z?-middle linear, and therefore induces a unique group homomor-
is an         exact sequence of abelian groups. An analogous statement holds for an exact se-                                                                                            phism a s              :A® R B-+A® R B such that a (a ® b) = sa® b. For. each element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s

quence in the first variable.

                                                                                                                    D® R C;
                                                                                                                                                                                         u =
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     JSai®bizA® R B define 5w to be the element                                   =   £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <x*te    ®M
         PROOF. We must prove: (i) Im (\ D ®g) =                                                                                                (ii)   Im (l D ®f) CI                            n

Ker (lz>            ®   g); and (iii) Ker (1 D                    ®g)Clm                      (1 D         ®        /).                                                                     =         ^®             Since a s is a homomorphism, this action of 5 is well defined (that is,

                                                                                                                                                                                         independent of how u is written as a sum of generators). It is now easy to verify that
       Since g is an epimorphism by hypothesis every generator d
         (i)                                                     c of Z)     C is                                                                  ®                         ®a          A      ® B             a left S-module.
of the form </(x) g{b) = (l D                          ®
                               g)(d® for some A e 5. Thus Im (l D    g) contains  W                                                                            ®                                  R        is


all generators of Z)        ® C, whence Im D ® = = D ®R C.=
                                                 fl                               (1          g)                                           (ii)   Since Ker g = Im /
we           have       gf=0 and    ® D ® /)        ® g/
                                                      (lz>            g)(l                                 lz>                              lz>   ® =               0,       whence           REMARK. An important special case of Theorem 5.5 occurs when R is a com-
Im (ly>®/) C Ker (lz>®g).                                                 (iii)    Let       tt       :   Z)   ®* 5 — (D ® R B)/lm (Id®/)                                                mutative ring and hence every Z?-module A is an R-R bimodule with ra = ar

be the canonical epimorphism. By (ii) and Theorem 1.7 there is a homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                         (r e R,a s A). In this case A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R B is also an R-R bimodule with

a (Z):
                ®       ®
         R B)/lm (\ D ®f) -> D                       ®
                                  R C such that a(w(d® b)) = (\ D     g)(d® b)                                                                                                                              r(a®b) = ra®b = ar®b = a®rb = a®br = (a®b)r
= d®       We   show   a an isomorphism. This
                    g(b).              shall  and Theorem
                                                      that                is                                                          fact                                   1.7 will

imply Ker  D ® = Im D ® /) and thus complete
                        (l               g)           (l                                                                             the proof.                                          for 'd\l r z R, a z A, b eB.

   We show         map  D X C (D ® B)/lm D ®f) given by
                                first that the               /3   :                                            R                      (l                                     (d,c) H>

w(d®b), where g(Z>) = c, is independent of the choice of 6. Note that there is at                                                                                                            If Z? is a commutative ring, then the tensor product of Z?-modules may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    be char-
least one such 6 since g is an epimorphism. If g(b') = c, then g(b — b') =   and                                                                                                         acterized by a useful variation of Theorem 5.2. Let A,B,C be modules over a com-

b - b' z Ker g = Im / whence b — b' = f(a) for some as/4. Since d® f{a) s                                                                                                                mutative ring R. A bilinear map from A X B to C is a function
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f A X B -+ C such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :



Im (lz>             ®
           /) and T(d®f(a)) = 0, we have                                                                                                                                                that for all a,^ £ ^, Z?A £ B, and r £ R:

                                    tt(</(X)   « = tt(</® A' + /(a)) = ttW® A' + d®f{a))                                                                                                                                           + a ,6) = f(a u b) + f(a ,b);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f(ai        2                     2                                     (9)
                                                 = T(d® b') + ir(d®f(a)) = tt(</® 6').
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /feA + W = /(a,fc) + /(fl,^;                                          (10)
Therefore                   is well defined.          Verify that (3 is middle linear. Then by Theorem 5.2 there
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /(rfl> A) = r/(a,« = /( fl ,rA).
is       a     unique_ homomorphism £                                 :    Z)     ®* C -> (Z) (x)* £)/Im (U ® /) such that                                                                                                                                                                            (11)

/3(d®c) = PKd,c) = 0(d,c) = w(d®b), where g(b) = c. Therefore, for any gener-                                                                                                           Conditions (9) and (10) are simply a restatement of (3) and (4) above. For modules
ator d®c of                           D®
                  R C, a/3(d®c) = a(ir(d®b)) = d®g(b) = d®c, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                        over a commutative ring (11) clearly implies condition (5) above, whence every bi-

               the identity map. Similarly pa is the identity so that a is an isomorphism.                                                                                              linear map is middle linear.
         is



   REMARKS. If h A R -> /1r' and k R B R B' are module epimorphisms, then
                                                 :                                     :      ^                                                                                           EXAMPLE. If A * is the dual of a module A over a commutative ring R, then the
Proposition 5.4 implies that                               U®
                                    and /z® 1/? are group epimorphisms. Hence                                                                                                           map A X A* -> R given by (aj)\-+f(a) = (a,f) is bilinear (see p. 204).
h    ®
     k:A   R B
                ->      ®
                   A' ®a B' is an epimorphism since      k = {\ A   &)(/z 1 B ).                                          h®                               .   ®              ®
However, if /z and A: are monomorphisms,                                                   h®\ B and                  1 .i       ® k need                          be monomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                EXAMPLE. If A and B are modules over a commutative ring R, then so is
phisms (Exercise 7).                                                                                                                                                                    A   ® B and
                                                                                                                                                                                                 R    the canonical middle linear map :A X B^ A   R B is easily seen to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ®
                                                                                                                                                                                        be bilinear. In this context / is called the canonical bilinear map.


Theorem 5.5. Let R and S 6e rings and S A R R B, C R R D S (bi)modules as indicated.              ,                   ,




             (i)    A ® R B is a left S-module such that s(a ® b) = sa ® b for all s e S, a £ A,                                                                                        Theorem 5.6. Z/A,B,C are modules over a commutative ring R and g A X B — C                    :



beB.
            A — A' /s a homomorphism of S-R bimodules and g B — B' /s art
                                                                                                                                                                                        is a bilinear map, then there is a unique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R-module homomorphism g A          R B -> C     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ®
             (ii)   // f    :            >                                                                                                                     :         >
                                                                                                                                                                                        such that gi - g, where       A X B -> A R B is the canonical bilinear map. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ®
R-module homomorphism, then the induced map f ® g A ® R B — A' ® R B' is a                                                       :                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                        module A           ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                      R B is uniquely determined up to isomorphism by this property.
homomorphism of left S-modules.
         (iii)      C   ®R D             is    a right S-module such that                                      (c   ®        d)s           = c    ® ds for               all c e C,        SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that the unique homomorphism of abelian
deD, seS.
       Z/h C —>                              C
                     /j oai R-module homomorphism and k D — D' # homomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                        groups g A     R B -> C given by Theorem 5.2 is actually an Z?-module homomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                       :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ®
         (iv)                   :                                                                                                           :          >                                phism. To prove the last statement let ®>(A,B) be the category of all bilinear maps on
phism of R-S bimodules, then the induced map h   k C ®^> D —      R D'  <a                                     ®             :                             >   C®                 /'j
                                                                                                                                                                                        A X B (defined by replacing the groups C,D and group homomorphism h C -> D                            :


homomorphism of right S-modules.                                                                                                                                                        by modules and module homomorphisms in the definition of m(A,B) on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p. 207).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     }




212                                             CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                                            5.       TENSOR PRODUCTS                                                                                                                               213


Then first part of the Theorem shows that / A X B — A      R B is a universal object
                                                                            :
                                                                                                                ®                                           Therefore, (A                            ® B) ® C
                                                                                                                                                                                                        R           ® ®    s             is        generated by all elements of the form {a                                                                                               b)             c
in (&(A B) whence A
           9       9                   ®
                          R B is uniquely determined up to isomorphism by Theo-                                                                             (aeA beB ce C). Similarly, /I
                                                                                                                                                                          9                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ® ® with                                ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R (B             ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s C) is generated by all a  (b                                                                                               c)
rem 1.7.10.
                                                                                                                                                            aeA beB   9    Verify              c e C.
                                                                                                                                                                                     the assignment
                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Z ® /]hE= ® ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                    \i=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i    l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (fc                c)]

    Theorem 5.6 may also be used to provide an alternate definition of A   R B when                                                    ®                          an S-middle
                                                                                                                                                            defines                map (A ® B) X C -> A ® (B ®   linear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Therefore, by                                       R                                                         R                      s C).
R is a commutative ring with identity. Let Fi be the free R-module on the set A X B                                                                         Theorem           a homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                   5.2 there is
and ATi the submodule generated by all elements of the forms:

                                               {a + a' b) - (a b) - (a' b);
                                                            9               9                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                 ® B) ® C -> A ® (B ® C)             a (A  :                   R                s                                         R                       s


                                               (a b + b') - (a b) - (a b')\
                                                    9                       9                   9
                                                                                                                                                            with      ® ® = a® ®
                                                                                                                                                                      a[(a                  a A b B
                                                                                                                                                                                               b)           c]                           (b             c) for all                           e        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e           9   c e C. Similarly there is an

                                                      - r(a b);                                                                                             /^-middle    map A X (B ® C) —
                                                                                                                                                                                   linear    ®« 5) ® C                                                 s                >   (/*                                       5                       that induces a                          homo-
                                               (ra 9 b)                 9
                                                                                                                                                            morphism
                                               (a rb) — r(a b)\
                                                    9                   9




where a a! e A b b' e B; and r e R; (compare Definition 5.1). We claim that there is
               9             \    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0:A® R (B® s C)-> (A ® R B) ® s C
an ^-module isomorphism A        R B               ® ^
                                       Fi/Kx. The obvious analogue of the proof of
                                                                                                                                                                     ® ® = ® ®
                                                                                                                                                           such that 0[a                          a A b B
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b       C. For every genera-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c)]            (a                 b)           c for all                         £                   e                   c s
Theorem 5.2 shows that the map A X B -> Fi/Ki given by (a b) h* 1         + ft is a                                                                             ® ® of ® B) ® C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9                       9




universal object in the category ®>(A B) of bilinear maps on A
                                                                                                                    9



                                                                                                                        X B. Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                           tor (a                 b)
                                                                                                                                                                    map on (A ® R B) ®
                                                                                                                                                                                             ® b)®c] = (a®b)® whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                 c                         R                       s                                                                                                        c,                                /3a is
                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                           the identity                    A    argument shows     0a the                          s C.         similar                                                                             that            is            identity
A   ® B ^ /y ft by Theorem
       R                                            5.6.
                                                                                                                                                           on A ® (B ®      Therefore, a and
                                                                                                                                                                              R                      s C).
                                                                                                                                                                                              isomorphisms.                                                             are
      We return now to
                    modules over                                arbitrary rings.

                                                                                                                                                              In the future we shall identify (A R B)   s Cand A    R (B     s C) under the                     ®                     ®                                               ®                ®
Theorem                5.7. IfR is a ring with identity and                         A R R B are unitary R-modules then
                                                                                            ,                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                           isomorphism of Theorem 5.8 and simply write A
                                                                                                                                                           define recursively the «-fold tensor product:
                                                                                                                                                                                                           R B   s C. It is now possible to                                                          ® ®
there are R-module isomorphisms

                                           A (X) R R ^ A                and         R ®r B = B.                                                                                                                                A ®^ A>®R2 .-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ®          Rn       A«+\

                                                                                                                                                           where /?,,...,/?„ are rings and A Rl \ Rl A R *, Rn A»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     are (bi)modules. Such iter-
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since R is an R-R bimodule R® R B is a left R-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .   ,


                                                                                                                                                           ated tensor products may also be characterized in terms of universal /z-linear maps
module by Theorem 5.5. The assignment (r b)\-^rb defines a middle linear map    9                                                                          (Exercise 10).
R X B-+B. By Theorem 5.2 there is a group homomorphism a                    R B-+B                                                    :R®
such that c*0              ®
                b) = rb. Verify that a is in fact a homomorphism of left /^-modules.
                                                                                                                        ®b
Then verify that the map                           :B^R®
                                          R B given by b\-> l R   is an i?-module

homomorphism such that a0 = \ B and 0a = \ R <g) R B. Hence a R       R B^B. The                                            :
                                                                                                                                ®                          Theorem 5.9. Let R be a ring, A and                                                                      A,          i    £ 1}            right R-modu!es 9 B and { Bj                                                              £ J
isomorphism A     R R     A is
                                  ®
                               constructed = similarly.
                                                                                                                                                           left R-modules.                           Then there are group isomorphisms.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                {           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          j




   If R and S* are rings and A R R B S sC are (bi)modules, then A
                                                        ,           ,  R B is a right                                            ®                                                                                             (E A,)®rB^I:(A, ®rB);
S-module and                     B®
                    S C is a left ^-module by Theorem 5.5. Consequently, both
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iel                                              iel


(A    ®
      R B)   S C and   ®  R (B® S     A®                    Q
                                       are well-defined abelian groups.                                                                                                                                                        A®n(£ B,)^E(A(8)bB,).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   jeJ                       j&J




Theorem 5.8. IfR andS are rings and Ar, R B S sC are (bi)modules then there is an       ,                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                PROOF. Let 1*, Tk be the canonical injections and projections of                                                                                                                                          Z                     %
isomorphism                                                                                                                                                Theorem 1.8.5 the family of homomorphisms i k                                                                                             ® B A®   \       :               k             R B ->      (Z A ) ® R B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    iel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              {




                                           (A ®rB)® C^A ® r (B ® C).
                                                                s                                           s                                              induce a homomorphism a                                              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Z (A ®r                        B) -*                (Z A) ®r B such that a[{a ® b}}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        iEl                                                  isI


      PROOF. By definition every element v of {A                                                        ® B) ® C
                                                                                                            R           s        is   a finite       sum
                                                                                                                                                           = 2^ M^) ®b) = (Z tife))
                                                                                                                                                               te^o                                              tela
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ® b where    9                         /           =    {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i   e I     \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a   t   ®b ^                 0|   .    The assign-

                                 eA® R B a C). Since each                                   ® B                                       Z ®a
                                                                                                                                                           ment           (u 9 b) |->                7rt-(w)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ®      £} <t/                defines                   a       middle                        linear                           map         (Z                     X 5 ->
Z ®a
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (


      a,               (ui                     e                                    e   A               R   is   a finite sum              <ki        h
                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                           9




to, s A, bij s £), we have
                                                                                                                                                               (^t        ®« 5 and thus induces a homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                           )                                                                                                              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Z A) ®« B -> Z (^» ®« #)
                                               Z (Z ®                                               ZZ                  ®             ® dl
                                                                                                                                                           such that 0(w                       ®     6)     =        7r,-(w)        ®          b) itI          We shall show that a0 and /to are the respec-
                       Z ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {                                         .


           o       =                  Ci   =                            &,) ®ft =                                [to,           bid                        tive identity maps, whence a is an isomorphism.
214                                                              CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                    5.        TENSOR PRODUCTS                                                                                                            215


      Recall that if u e]T) A { and 7                                             = {/ e /     |
                                                                                                   7r<(«)     ^ 0}, then u =       ^ ^(")- Thus         Theorem 5.11. Let R be a ring with identity. If A is a unitary right R-module and F
                                                                                                                                                                  R-module with basis Y, then every element u of A (g) R F may be written
                                                                                                                                                        is a free left
for every generator « (x) ft of                                               /* t ) (x) fl   5 we have                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                        uniquelyin the form u = 2^ ai (X) y i5 where a, e                                                                           A and the y are distinct elementsofY.
                                      (X) ft) .= a[{ tt.W                      ®b}] = (£ utt^u)) (g)                     ft   = « (g)   ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    {




Consequently a(3 is the identity map.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t                                                             m
   For each jel let t,-* /4 (X) fl B                 :
                                                           3
                                                             -




                                                                                        i
                                                                                                       ®« 5) be the canonical injection and                 REMARK. Given u =
                                                                                                                                                                                   k=\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       £       a k (g)y k and                           v       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    j=\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b (g)z i (a k ,bi £ A, y k ,z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ]                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e Y),


                                                                                                                                                   =    we may, if necessary, insert terms of the form                                                                                                                    Y) and assume that
                     22 ( A ®R B ) is generated by all elements of the form i*(a (x) ft)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (x) y (y e
verify that                           <
                                                                                                                                                                 n                                                             n
                         i


{   ^(0) (x)        ft
                         }   te/ (y       £ /, a e /4 3 ,        ft       £ B).    For each such generator we have (7^(0)) (x) 6                        u = 12 a
                                                                                                                                                               /'= i
                                                                                                                                                                               *   ®       y< and v           =        H h ® y The word "uniquely"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      { .                                                               in Theorem 5.11 means
=      if z ?± j and {ir^ia))
              '

                                                         ®       ft       =       (X) ft, whence                                                                       n                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i           i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n


                    0a[ij*(a (g) ft)]                    = /3a[{7rih (a) (g) ft}] = fli,^*) «                            ®                             that if
                                                                                                                                                                  i   =    i
                                                                                                                                                                                   a i ®yi =          H
                                                                                                                                                                                                      /= l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b (x) y u then a { = b{ for every /. In particular, if Y\ a { (x) y t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x                                                                                                                                                    -




                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                         = flU/a)®         = {W«)<8)*U =                                                    ft).
                                                                                                                                                        =      = 2^
                                                                                                                                                                      i   =    i
                                                                                                                                                                                       ® y then a =
                                                                                                                                                                                              i9                       {                       for every /.

Consequently the map (3a must be the identity. The second isomorphism is proved
similarly.
                                                                                                                                                            PROOF OF 5.11. For each y e Y, let A y be a copy of A and consider the direct
                                                                                                                                                       sum2j A y We first construct an isomorphism 6 A (g) R
                                                                                                                                                                                   .                                                                                                                 :                                A v as follows
                                                                                                                                                               y* Y                                                                                                                                                             y*Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

Theorem 5.10. (Adjoint Associativity) Let R and S be rings and A R R Bs, Cs (bi)-                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                       Since Kis a basis,                          {>^}       is       a linearly independent set for each y e Y. Consequently,
modules. Then there is an isomorphism of abelian groups                                                                                                the /^-module epimorphism <p :R-+ Ry given by r |-> ry (Theorem 1.5) is actually
                                                                                                                                                       an isomorphism. Therefore, by Theorem 5.7 there is for each y e Y an isomorphism
                                          a    :   Hom s (A               ®R B,C) ^ Hom R(A,Hom                      s (B,C)),


defined for each f                        :   A (X) R B — C fty       >
                                                                                                                                                                                                          A    ® Ry U ®* A     R                                \       (x) R           R ~ A = A,.

                                                                                              = f(a (g) b).                                            Thus by Theorems 5.9 and 1.8.10 there is an isomorphism 6:
                                                                      [(afXa)](b)

                                                                                                                                                                                           A(g) R    F= A(g) R                                              *>0^£^(8>**v^£^.
      Note that Hom^(                                ,    )       and Hom s (                  ,        )   consist of homomorphisms of right
modules. Recall that the .R-module structure of Hom s (B,C) is given by: (gr)(b) =                                                                     Verify that for every a e A, z £ Y, 6(a (x) z) = \u y                                                                                \   £^ A, where u = a and u =       2                            v
g(rb) (for r e R, b e B, g e                             Hom s (2?,C); see Exercise 4.4(c)).                                                           for ^  ^ z; in other words, ® z) = i,( with A -^J^ ^ the canonical in-                                          fl ),                         :     z

                                                                                                                                                       jection. Now every nonzero v e^T, A
                                                                                                                                                                                           y is a finite sum v = («i) H    n)                                                                                            t yi                          f-   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                yfl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (fl

      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.10. The proof is a straightforward exercise in the                                                                          = ^(fli    ® ^0 H                            h <9(«n (X) >^ n ) with      K and «                        >^i,    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   >^ n        distinct elements                     of                                t

use of the appropriate definitions. The following items must be checked.                                                                               uniquely determined nonzero elements of A. It follows that every element of A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (g) R F
       (i)        For each a e A, and feHom s (A                                              ® £,C),
                                                                                                   K           (af)(a)   :    B -> C is an S-module
                                                                                                                                                       (which is necessarily 6~\v) for some v) may be written uniquely as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n

homomorphism.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2^ a       {            y{   .          m
      (ii)        (af)       :   A — Hom s (B,C) is an /^-module homomorphism. Thus a is a well-
                                          >


defined function.
        a is a group homomorphism (that is, a(j\ + f2 ) = a(f) + a(f2)). To show
      (iii)
                                                                                                                                                       Corollary 5.12.  //R « r/Wg with identity and A R «A2^ R B are free R-modules with
that a is an isomorphism, construct an inverse map /3 Horn R ( A, Horn S (B,C))                                      :
                                                                                                                                                       bases    X and Y respectively, then A ® R B zs « free (right) R-module with basis
Hom 5 (^ (g) R B,C) by defining                                                                                                                        W = {x             (x) y        |
                                                                                                                                                                                           x e X,y £ Y}                        of cardinality |X||Y|.

                                                                      Wg)(a®b) = [g(a)](b\                                                                 REMARKS. Since R is an R-R bimodule, so is every direct sum of copies of R.
where ae A, beB, and g e Hom^/l^om^C)). Verify that                                                                                                    In particular, every free left ^-module is also a free right ^-module and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               vice versa.
   (iv) (3g as defined above on the generators determines a unique S-module homo-
                                                                                                                                                       However, it is not true in general that a free (left) /^-module is a free object in the cat-
morphism A (x)^ B —> C.                                                                                                                                egory of R-R bimodules (Exercise 12).
   (v)  is a homomorphism.

      (vi) (3a       and a/3 are the respective identities. Thus a is an isomorphism.                                                                     SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.12. By the proof of Theorem 5.11 and by Theo-
                                                                                                                                                       rem 2.1 (for right 7?-modules) there is a group isomorphism
      We close this section with an investigation of the tensor product of free modules.
Except for an occasional exercise this material will be used only in Section IX. 6.
                                                                                                                                                                                               e:A® R                              B^A          y*Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       yzY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            =X(2>*)-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ye Y xeX
                                                                                                                                                                       Z         Z


216                                                        CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                              5.       TENSOR PRODUCTS                                                             217


Since B is an R-R bimodule by the remark preceding the proof, A                                                  ® B
                                                                                                                   R   is a right          7.    The usual injection a                       :   Z — Z is a monomorphism of abelian groups. Show that
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2         >   4

/^-module by Theorem 5.5. Verify that 6 is an isomorphism of right 7?-modules such                                                               1       ®a        :   2   (x)   2   ^Z (x)Z 2                  4 is    the zero map (butZ2 (x)Z2           ^ 0andZ (x)Z ^ 0;   2           4
that 6(W) is a basis of the free right /^-module                                           T] xR). Therefore, A (x) R Bis a
                                                                                            (                                                    see Exercise 2).
                                                                                         y x
free right i?-module with basis                                 W. Since the elements of           W are   all distinct by Theo-       8.        Let             -> /I -4 £              C ->              be a short exact sequence of left 7?-modules and D a
rem 5.11, W\ - \X\\Y\.                         m
                       \

                                                                                                                                                 right fl-module.                    Then    RB  0^D®R A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Z)   R C ->  is a short           D® ^> ®
                                                                                                                                                 exact sequence of abelian groups under anyone of the following hypotheses:

Corollary 5.13. Let She a ring with identity andRa subring ofS that contains Is- //F
                                                                                                                                                         (a)      -* A    B U C -> is split exact.
is a free left R-module with basis X, then S (x)r F is a free left S-module with basis
                                                                                                                                                         (b)     R has an identity and D is a free right i?-module.
     ls   (X) x        x s X} of cardinality |X|.
                                                                                                                                                         (c)     R has an identity and D is a projective unitary right 7?-module.
{                  |




                                                                                                                                       9. (a) If / is a right ideal of a ring                                           R with identity and B a left 7?-module, then there
          SKETCH OF PROOF. Since S is clearly an S-R bimodule, S (x) R F is a left                                                              is        a group isomorphism                              R/I         ®R B ^ B/IB, where IB       is the subgroup of B
S-module by Theorem 5.5. The proof of Theorem 5.11 shows that there is a group                                                                  generated by all elements rb with reI,beB.
isomorphism 6 S (x) fi F ==                        ^
                            SX9 with each Sx = S. Furthermore, if for zsX,
                                :                                                                                                               (b) If           R is commutative and 7,7 are ideals of R, then there is an 7?-module iso-
iz   :    S = S z ^>^2 Sx is the canonical injection, then 0(1 s (x) z) = ^(ls) for each zsX.
                                                                                                                                                morphism R/I (g) R R/J                                ^ R/(I + 7).
                                                                                                                                      10. If i?,5 are rings,     A Ri R B S S C are (bi)modules and D an abelian group, define a
Verify that 6 is in fact an isomorphism of left S-modules. Clearly, {^(ls)                                                   xeX}                                                                      ,




is       a basis of cardinality \X\ of the free                                  left   S-module    ^ S whence S
                                                                                                           X1
                                                                                                                         |




                                                                                                                       (x)^   F is
                                                                                                                                                middle linear map to be a function f\                    such that                AXBXC^D
                                                                                                    xtX
a free 5-module with basis                                 {   Is (x) x       x e X]    of cardinality \X\.
                                                                                                                                                           (i)   /(*  + a'M = f(aAc) + /(*',£,<•);
                                                                          \




                                                                                                                                                         (ii)    fifljb+      = /(aAc) +
                                                                                                                                                         (iii)   /(* Ac + c') = /(* Ac) + f(aAc');
                                                                                                                                                         (iv) f(ar,b,c)          = f(a,rb,c) for r e R;
                                                                  EXERCISES                                                                               (v) f(a,bs,c)          = Ra,b sc) for 5 e 5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t



          Note: R is a ring and (x) = (x) z                          .
                                                                                                                                                     (a)         Themap/:^ X^X C-+(A (x) R B) (x) s C given by («,Z?,c) H (a (x) &) (x) c
     L If          = Z, then condition (iii) of Definition 5.1 is superfluous (that is, (i) and(ii)                                             is   middle linear.
          imply (iii)).                                                                                                                              (b)         The middle linear map / is universal; that is, given a middle linear map
                                                                                                                                                g         A X # X C — Z),                             there              exists    a       unique      group          homomorphism
          Let A and B be abelian groups.
                                                                                                                                                     :                               >
    2.

             (a)       For each m > 0, A (x) Zm ^
                                                                                                                                                rW®^)®sC-^D such that gi =                                                        g.
                                                                                                                                                     (c)         The       map                    A X B X C                                A           (B
             (b)       Zm (x)Zn = Z where c = (w,/z).
                                          C,
                                                                                                                                                                                         j   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (g) R        (g) s      C)   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    given       by
             (c)       Describe A(x)B, when                              and i? are finitely generated.
                                                                                                                                                (a,b,c)  H (X) (6 (x) c) also a universal middle linear map.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 is

                                                                                                                                                     (d) (A® R B)(g) s C^A (g) R (B® s C) by (b), (c), and Theorem 1.7.10.
    3.    If A     is       a torsion abelian group and                         Q the (additive) group of rationals, then                            (e)         Define a middle linear function on n (bi)modules (n > 4) in the obvious
             (a)           A <g) Q = 0.                                                                                                         way and sketch a proof of the extension of the above results to the case of n (bi)-
             (b)           Q (X) Q       Q.                                                                                                     modules (over n — 1 rings).
    4.    Give examples to show that each of the following may actually occur for suitable                                                        (0 If R = S, R is commutative and A,B,C,D are /^-modules, define a trilinear
          rings R and modules A R R B.                 ,
                                                                                                                                                map A X B X C -> D and extend the results of (a),(b),(c) to such maps.
             (a) A (x)ij B     A (x) z B.                                                                                            11.    Let A,B,C be modules over a commutative ring R.
             (b) w s A (x) R B, but u ?± a(x) b for any as A, b e B.
                                                                                                                                             (a) The set £(A,B;C) of all 7?-bilinear maps A X B —> C is an
                                                                                                                                                                                                           /^-module with
             (c) a®b = ai®b but a ^ «i and             ^ Z>l
                                               Y                                   Z>
                                                                                                                                            (/+ g)(a,b) = f(a,b) + g(a,b) and (rf)(a,b) = rf(a,b).
    5.    If /I' is a submodule of the right /^-module A and B' is a submodule of the left                                                           (b)       Each one of the following /^-modules is isomorphic to £(A,B;C):
          /^-module B, then A/ A' (x) R B/B'                              ^ (A     (x) R B)/C, where    C is    the subgroup of
                                                                                                                                                                 (i)   Hom R (A(g) R B,C);
          A (x) R B generated by all elements a' (x) b and a® b' with a z A, a' e A', b e B,
          b'zB'.
                                                                                                                                                               (ii)    Hom^,Hom (fi,C));          fl

                                                                                                                                                            (iii)      Hom^Hom^.O).
    6.    Let /        :
                              —* A R and g
                                     '
                                                   :       R B -> R B be /^-module homomorphisms. What is the
                                                                          r



                                                                                                                                     12.    Assume R has an identity. Let 6 be the category of all unitary R-R bimodules
          difference between the homomorphism /(x) g (as given by Corollary 5.3) and the
                                                                                                                                            and bimodule homomorphisms (that is, group homomorphisms / A          B such
          element           f® g of the tensor product of abelian groups                                                                    that /(ray) = rf(a)s for all r s s R). Let                                            ^=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                9                      {   1^} and let      t   :   X -+ R be the in-
                                               Uom R (A,A') (X) Hom*(£,£')?                                                                 clusion map.
                                                                                                                                              .




218                                           CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                       6.         MODULES OVER A PRINCIPAL IDEAL DOMAIN                                                                                                                     219


         (a) If    R is noncommutative, then R (equipped with                               l   :   X — R)   is       not a free                          (iii)           for each / £ /,              Fi+ i/F ^ Rx ^ R. [Apply Theorem 1.7 to the canonical pro-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  {                    {


      object on the set         X in the category C.                                                                                              jection Fi+ i =                      ^+ Rx —              k                >    Rxi.]
         (b)     R®zR          is   an R-R bimodule (Theorem                        5.5).       If   l\X-+ R          ®Z R                  is
                                                                                                                                                                                      fc<i        l



      given by \ R    H    \   R (x) l R then R (x) z R is a free object on the set
                                          ,
                                                                                                         X in the cate-                           For each j e J let G                            }
                                                                                                                                                                                                   •   = G fl Fj and verify that:
      gory e.
                                                                                                                                                          (iv)          j<k=>GjC Gk                                 ;


                                                                                                                                                           (v)            U Gj = G;
                                                                                                                                                                          je.J

                                                                                                                                                          (vi) for each                  /'
                                                                                                                                                                                              £ /,         G = Gi+
                                                                                                                                                                                                            t                                 i   fl       F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {.

6.    MODULES OVER A PRINCIPAL IDEAL DOMAIN
                                                                                                                                                          Property                (vi)            and Theorem                                          1.9(i)           imply that                        Gi+1 /Gi = Gi+ i/(Gi+            i       fl       F){

      The chief purpose of this section, which will be used again only in Sections                                                                ^ (G + Fi)/Fi. But (G + Fi)/Fi
                                                                                                                                                                   i+ i                             submodule of Fi+l /F      Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i+ i                              is           a                                                {.

VII. 2 and VII. 4, is to determine the structure of all finitely generated modules over a                                                         Gi+i/Gi is isomorphic to a submodule of R by (iii). But every submodule of
principal ideal domain. Virtually all of the structure theorems for finitely generated                                                            R is necessarily an ideal of R and hence of the form (c) = Rc for some c e R. If c ^ 0,
abelian groups (Sections II. 1,11. 2) carry over to such modules. In fact, most of the                                                            then the /^-module epimorphism R — > Rc of Theorem 1.5(i) is actually an isomor-
proofs in Sections II. 1 and                  II. 2   extend immediately to modules over Euclidean                                                phism. Thus every submodule of R (and hence each Gl+ i/G ) is free of rank or 1 By                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t

domains. However, several of them must be extensively modified in order to be valid
                                                                                                                                                  Theorems 3.2 and 3.4 the sequence —> G          Gi+i —> Gi+ i/Gi — is split exact for                                 t
for modules over an arbitrary principal ideal domain. Consequently, we shall use a
                                                                                                                                                  every / £ /. Theorem 1.18 and Exercise 1.15 imply that each Gl+i is an internal direct
different approach in proving the structure theorems here.                             We shall show that just as
in the case of abelian groups every finitely generated module may be decomposed in
                                                                                                                                                  sum Gi+ = Gi         Rbi, where b e Gi+ - G and Rb ^Rif Gi+l 9* Git and & =
                                                                                                                                                                          i           ©                                                       {                i            t                       {




two ways as a direct sum of cyclic submodules (Theorem 6.12). Each decomposition
                                                                                                                                                  if Gi+   =        i         d
                                                                                                                                                                  (that is, Gi+X /   = 0). Thus h e G is defined for each / e /. Let      d
                                                                                                                                                  B = \bi\ k       0}. Then |Z?| < |/| = rank F. To complete the proof we need only
provides a set of invariants for the given module (that is, two modules have the same
                                                                                                                                                  show that B is a basis of G.
invariants if and only if they are isomorphic (Corollary 6.13)). Thus each method of                                                                                         = 0(/e/;r,e/?; finite sum). Let k be the largest index (if
decomposition leads to a complete classification (up to isomorphism) of all finitely
                                                                                                                                                     Suppose u =         r                             A
generated modules over a principal ideal domain. Here and throughout this section                                                                 one      exists)               such that                 rk               ^ 0. Then u = Yl r b + r ^k £ G                             i   i                         k       Rb k = G k+      i.       But
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            j <k
"module" means "unitary module".
                                                                                                                                                  u —    implies that rk = 0, which is a contradiction. Hence = for all j. Therefore,
   We begin with free modules over a principal ideal domain R. Since R has the in-                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r,-


                                                                                                                                                  B is linearly independent.
variant dimension property by Corollary 2.12, the rank of a free .R-module (Defini-
                                                                                                                                                      Finally we must prove that B spans G. It suffices by (v) to prove that for each
tion 2.8) is well defined. In particular, two free /^-modules are isomorphic if and
                                                                                                                                                  k £ J the subset B k = b -e B j < k] of B spans G k We shall use transflnite induc-                                                           .

only if they have the same rank (Proposition 2.9). Furthermore we have the follow-                                                                                                                     {    }                         \




                                                                                                                                                  tion (Introduction, Theorem 7.1). Suppose, therefore, that                                                                                                          spans G, for all j <k
ing generalization of Theorem II. 1.6.
                                                                                                                                                  and let u e G k                 .    If     k = j             '       +         1       for          some j £ /, then                                 G k = G,- +1 = G,                 Rbj and
                                                                                                                                                  u = v             + rbj with v s G                       ; .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        By the induction hypothesis v is a finite sum v =                                                                                   r*^»
                                                                                                                                                  with ri £ R and bi z Bj                              d B Therefore, u =
                                                                                                                                                                                                            whence B k spans G k Now
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k.                                                      r   A+                                                     .



Theorem 6.1. Let F be a free module over a principal ideal domain R and G a sub-                                                                  suppose that k ^ j -\- 1 for all j s I (and this may happen; see the examples pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                              '




module of¥. Then G is a free R-module and rank G < rank F.                                                                                        ceding Theorem 7.1 of the Introduction). Since u e G k =                                                                                                  G fl Fk u is a finite sum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,



                                                                                                                                                  " = 2L r i x i w * tri J < k. If Ms the largest index such that r 7* 0, then u e Ft+ i with                                                                     t


      SKETCH OF PROOF. Let {x                          {   \
                                                               i   e 1}   be a basis of F. Then F =                    Rx with     <              /   +    1        < k by hypothesis. Therefore, u s G f) Ft+ = G t+ with t + 1 < k. By the                                                i               i


                                                                                                                                                  induction hypothesis u is a linear combination of elements of B t+ i, which is a subset
each Rxi isomorphic to R (as a left i?-module). Choose a well ordering < of the set /
                                                                                                                                                  of B k Hence B h spans G k
(Introduction, Section 7). For each / £ / denote the immediate successor of / by /  1                                                   +                      .                                                        .




(Introduction, Exercise 7.7). Let J = I U {a} where a \ I and by definition ,                                                      /    < a
for all / e /. Then J is well ordered and every element of / has an immediate successor
in/. 1 For each j e J define Fj to be the submodule of F generated by the set                                     {
                                                                                                                      Xi   \
                                                                                                                               i       < j]       Corollary 6.2. Let Rbe a principal ideal domain. IfA is a finitely generated R-module
Verify that the submodules Fj have the following properties:                                                                                      generated by n elements, then every submodule of A may be generated by        elements                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                  with     m < n.
       (i)   j <   k^FjCZ F          k;

      (ii)   U   Fi = F;                                                                                                                                  PROOF. Exercise; see Corollary II. 1.7 and Corollary 2.2.

   x
     The set J is a technical device needed to cope with the possibility that some (necessarily
unique) element of / has no immediate successor in /. This occurs, for example, when /                                                            Corollary 6.3.                      A unitary module A over a principal ideal domain is free if and only if
is finite.                                                                                                                                        A is projective.
220                                                           CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                              6.           MODULES OVER A PRINCIPAL IDEAL DOMAIN                                                                                              221



    PROOF. (=>) Theorem 3.2. (*=) There is a short exact sequence — K^> F ^                                                                                EXAMPLE. Let R = Z and let ^ be an (additive) abelian group. Suppose the
A —*    with F free, / an epimorphism and K = ker / by Corollary 2.2. If A is projec-
                                                                                                                                                       group theoretic order of a e A (Definition 1.3.3) is finite. Then a = («), where \n\ is
                                                                                                                                                       the group theoretic order of a. If a e A has infinite order, then a = (0). In either case
tive, then F = AT     ,4 by Theorem 3.4. Therefore, is isomorphic to a submodule of

F, whence A is free by Theorem 6.1.
                                                                                                                                                       7m is the cyclic subgroup (a) generated by a (Theorem 1.2.8). Furthermore, 7m                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                       Z/(/i)              ^
                                                                                                                                                                Z„ if a = (n), n * 0; and 7m          Z/(0)     Z if a = (0).                       ^                 ^
      We now develop the analogues of the order of an element in a group and of the
torsion subgroup of an abelian group.
                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 6.5. A finitely generated torsion-free module A over a principal ideal do-
                                                                                                                                                       main R is free.


Theorem 6.4. Let A be a left module over an integral domain R and for each a s A                                                                                   REMARK. The hypothesis that A is finitely generated is essential (Exercise
let O a = {reR ra = 0).                                                                                                                                II.1.10).
                                        |




        (i)   O a is an ideal ofR for each a s A.                                                                                                                  PROOF OF 6.5. We may assume A ^ 0. Let * be a finite set of nonzero
       (ii)   A = (a e A
                   t                           |     a   5^ 0( is a submodule of A.                                                                    generators of A. If x eX, then rx =
                                                                                                                                                                                         (r e R) if and only if r =                                                                                  since A is torsion-free.
      (iii)   For each a e A there is an isomorphism of left modules                                                                                   Consequently, there is a nonempty subset S = {x u         ,x k                                                       .   .   .            ]   of       X that       is   maximal
                                                                                                                                                       with respect to the property:
                                                              R/Oa^Ra = {ra                         |
                                                                                                        reR}.
                                                                                                                                                                                          rixi H                      h rk x k =           (rt e R)            =»      a\   =               for all             /.

Let R be a principal ideal domain and                                              peRa prime.
                                                                                                                                                       The submodule F generated by S is clearly a free /^-module with basis S. If >> s X — S,
      (iv)    // p*a =                       (equivalently (p )        1
                                                                               C        a ),   then      a   = (p ) with  j
                                                                                                                                    <j <   i.
                                                                                                                                                       then by maximality there exist ry ,r u                                               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,   rk e R,   not all zero, such that rv y                                   + r X\   x

       (v)    //0 a = (pi), then p a ^                    j
                                                                       for all] such that                            <j <     i.                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                       4-      •   •   •   4- rk x k     = 0. Then ry y = —                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r{ Xi e F.          Furthermore, rv ^                                    since otherwise

      REMARK. Prime and irreducible elements coincide in a principal ideal domain                                                                      n =                 for every /. Since A' is finite, there exists a nonzero reR                                                               (namely r =                     Yl       rv)
by Theorem III. 3. 4.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yeX-S
                                                                                                                                                       such that rX = {rx x eX) is contained in F. Therefore, r/* = [ra\aeA\ CZ F. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                       |




                                                                                                                                                       map / A —*           :          is easily seen to be an /^-module homomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                              given by a |— >
      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.4. (iii) Use Theorems 1.5(i) and 1.7. (iv) By hy-
pothesis    = (r) for some reR. Since p e U r divides p\ Unique factorization in R
                   a
                                                                                    i
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                       with image rA. Since    is torsion-free Ker / = 0, whence A      Im f = rA CZ F.                                                                   ^
                                                                                                                                                       Therefore,                        is   free by Theorem 6.1.
(Theorem III. 3. 7) implies that r = p u with < j < and u a unit. Hence a = 0) }
                                                                                                                 i

= (p'u) = (/?>) by Theorem IIL3.2. (v) If p'a = with j < then pU a = (/? ),                                                    /,
                                                                                                                                                  l

                                                                                                                                                           Determining the structure of a finitely generated module A over a principal ideal
whence p       i
                       \   p   j
                                   .   This contradicts unique factorization in R.                                                                     domain now proceeds in three steps. We show first that A is a direct sum of a torsion
                                                                                                                                                       module and a free module (Theorem 6.6). Every torsion module is a direct sum of
      Let A be a module over an integral domain. The ideal                                                                     a in Theorem 6.4 is     "/^-primary modules" (Theorem 6.7). Finally every /7-primary module is a direct sum
called the order ideal of a e A.                                      The submodule A                        t       in   Theorem 6.4 is called the    of cyclic modules (Theorem 6.9).
torsion submodule of A. A is said to be a torsion module if A _= A t and to be torsion-
free if At         = 0. Every free module is torsion-free, but not vice versa (Exercise 2).
      Let A be a module over a principal ideal domain R. The order ideal of a e A is a                                                                 Theorem 6.S. If A is a finitely generated module over a principal ideal domain R,
principal ideal of R, say                                 a   = (r), and a is said to have order r. The element r is                                   then A = A    F, where F is a free R-module offinite rank and F ^ A/A
                                                                                                                                                                                     t                                                                                                                                          t.

unique only up to multiplication by a unit (Theorem III. 3. 2). The cyclic submodule
Ra generated by a (Theorem                                    1   .5) is said to be cyclic of order r.                        Theorem 6.4(iii) shows               SKETCH OF PROOF. The quotient module A/A                                                                             t   is       torsion-free since for
that a e A has order                               (that is, Ra is a cyclic module of order 0) if and only if Ra                                =R     each r ^ 0,
(that is, Ra is free of rank one). Also a e A has order r, with r a unit, if and only if
                                                                                                                                                               r{a 4- A )        t       = A   t                      rae A       =>            n(ra) =                for some                      rx   ^           =>        a e A
a = 0; (for a =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t

                                            R a = r'Kra)           = r~            = 0).
                                                                           l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                        \

                                                                                                                                                       Furthermore, A/A                            t       is   finitely generated since                        A is. Therefore, A/A is free of finite          t



   EXAMPLE. If R is a principal ideal domain and reR, then the quotient ring                                                                           rank by Theorem 6.5. Consequently, the exact sequence                                                                 —> A    A —»        —>       t



R/(r) is a cyclic /^-module with generator 0=1*4- (r). Clearly a = (r), whence a                                                                       is split             exact and          A^A ® A/A (Theorems 3.2 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t               t                                             3.4).        Under the isomorphism
has order r and /?/(/") is cyclic of order r. Theorem 6.4(iii) shows that every cyclic                                                                 A   t               A/ At ^ A of Theorem 3.4 the image of A is A and the image of A/A is a                     t             t                                                 t


module C over a principal ideal domain R is isomorphic to R/(r), where (r) = a and                                                                     submodule Fof A, which is necessarily free of finite rank. It follows that A is the
a is a generator of C.                                                                                                                                 internal direct sum A                                    = A    t   F(see Theorem 1.15).
                                                                                                                                                                      .                         .




222                                                                CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.        MODULES OVER A PRINCIPAL IDEAL DOMAIN                                                                                                                                                            223


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ~l
Theorem 6.7. Let A be a torsion module over a principal ideal domain R and for                                                                                                                                                                          Furthermore, b 9*                        and pb = p 'c — rp k a = p'c — r a = 0. If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (since                pj        c \ Ra)                                                             J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x


each prime p e R let A(p) = a e A a has order a power of p)        {                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra C\ Rb 9* 0, then there exists seR such that sb e Ra and sb 9* 0. Since sb 5*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and pb = 0, p does not divide 5. Therefore, 5 and /? n are relatively prime and
        A(p) is a submodule of A for each prime p e R;
             (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sx + /? n.y = l R for some    £ R (Theorem III. 3. 11). Thus since p n A = 0, b = \ R b
        A = ^2 A(p), where the sum is over all primes p e R. If A is finitely gener-
             (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = sxb + p nyb = x(sb) e Ra. Consequently, p*~ c = b + rp k ~ a e Ra. If j - 1 9* 0,                                                      l                                           l


ated, only finitely many of the A(p) are nonzero.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       this contradicts the minimality of y, and if j — 1 = 0, this contradicts the fact that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c { Ra. Therefore, Ra                                   fl   Rb = 0.
             PROOF, (i) Let a,b s A(p). If                                              a       = (/? ) and 06 = (p ) let k = max (r,s). Then
                                                                                                         r                                           s



p\a + b) = 0, whence                                        a +b   = O ) with
                                                                            l
                                                                                      < < k by Theorem 6.4(iv). Therefore,
                                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (ii) If A = Ra, let C = 0. If A 9* Ra, then let S be the set of all submodules B of
a,b s A(p) imply a                                   +   bz A(p).          A similar argument shows that a s A(p) and rsR                                                                                                                              A such that /to fl B = 0. S is nonempty since by (i) there is a nonzero be A such that
imply ra s A(p). Therefore, A(p) is a submodule.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra        Rb = 0. Partially order S by set-theoretic inclusion and verify that every chain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in S has an upper bound in S. By Zorn's Lemma there exists a submodule C of A that
                               = 0). By Theorem 'III. 3.7 r = pi ni
                              Let                 a e /4 with                                                                                                                                                       with p { dis-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p (A/C) =
             (ii)                                                                                                                                                           -   •
                                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                                   is maximal in S. Consider the quotient module A/C. Clearly                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and
tinct primes in R and each in > 0. For each  let n = /?j ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                     nk              Then
                                                             -p^Pi+i                                         /,                                          -   •                                          '       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    'Pk           .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a  +C)    = 0. Since  Ra  fl C  =    and   p""^   =^ 0, we have p ~\a + C) 9* C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
ru       .    .       .       , rk
                                   are relatively prime and there exist s u                                                   .       •   .   ,   sk e       R such that Sin +                                                        •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +       whence a + C has order /? n in ^/C and /? n-1 04/C) ^ 0- Now if A/C is not the cyclic
Ja^a = 1/e (Theorem III. 3. 11). Consequently, a = l R a - Sina + •• + s k rk a. But                                                                                                •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /^-module generated by a + C (that is, ^/C =^ ^(a + C)), then by (i) there exists
Pi Siria = Sira = 0, whence s^a z A(pi). We have proved that the submodules A(p)
  ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d + C £ ^/C such that J + C 9* C and                +      D R(d + C) = C. Since                                                                            Q
(p prime) generate the module A.
             Let p £ R be prime and let >4i be the submodule of A generated by all A(q) with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /te    C = 0, it follows that Ra f) (Rd         = 0. Since d\C, Rd + C is in S and                  +0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       properly contains C, which contradicts the maximality of C. Therefore, A/C is the
                                     m         for some m >      and a = #i                                                                                                                                         +                     +
q 5* p. Suppose a e A(p) D A Then p a =                            x .                 a                                                                                                                                  •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cyclic ^-module generated by a + C (that is, ^/C = /?(a + C)). Consequently,
with ai £ ^(<7i) for some primes q u  c/ all distinct from /?. Since  £ A(q x), there are
                                                                            .   .       .
                                                                                            ,        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^ = Ra + C, whence ^ = Ra          C by Theorem 1.15.
integers   w such that <fr m *"a» = 0, whence for g^O^ = 0. If d = <?i mi -<7* mt then
                                      t
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                  -   •                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



/?
     m and d are relatively prime and rp m     sd = 1 ^ for some r,s e R. Consequently,          +
a =                               m
                 + sda = 0. Therefore, /*(/?) f) A = and ^ = 23 ^ GO by Theo-
                  \       R a = rp a                                                                                              x


rem 1.15. The last statement of the Theorem is a consequence of the easily verified
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 6.9. Let A be a finitely generated module over a principal ideal domain R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       such that every element of A has order a power of some prime p £ R. Then A is a direct
fact that a direct sum of modules with infinitely many nonzero summands cannot be
finitely generated.                                  For each generator has only                                                          finitely               many nonzero coordi-                                                                  sum of cyclic R-modules of orders p nl                                                      ,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,       p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nk respectively,                                   where m > n 2 >                                 •       •   •    >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nk >   1.
nates.


             In order to determine the structure of finitely generated modules in which every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PROOF. The proof proceeds by induction on the number r of generators of A,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       with the case r =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       being trivial. If r > 1, then A is generated by elements a u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1                             a
element has order a power of a prime p (such as A(p) in Theorem 6.7), we shall need a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,    r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       whose orders are respectively p n \p m \p m \                                                                                     p mr            We may assume that
lemma. If A is an /^-module and r £ R, then rA is the set                                                                                                                 a £ A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       .       .                    .

                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                             ra   \                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m = max(A7 ,w             1                   2,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,    m   T \       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Then p A =                                          ni ~ l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and p         A 9* 0. By Lemma 6.8 there is a submodule C of A such that
Lemma 6.8. Let A be a module over a principal ideal domain R such that p n A =
and p n_1 A 9^ for some prime p £ R and positive integer n. Let a be an element of A of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A = Rai          ©           C. Let ir be the canonical epimorphism ir         A — C. Since A is generated                                                  :               >



                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       by a u a 2   ,   .   .   .   ,   ar   ,    C must be generated by Tr(ai)Ma2),        ir(a ). But ir(ai) = 0,                                                        .   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,            r
order p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       whence C may be generated by r — 1 or fewer elements. Consequently, the induction
                                  .




             (i)              If A ?± Ra, then there exists a nonzero b £ A such that Ra                                                                                        fl              Rb = 0.                                                hypothesis implies that C is a direct sum of cyclic /^-modules of orders p n2 ,p n \                                                                                                                                    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nk

             (ii)             There is a submodule C of A such that A = Ra        C.                                                              ©                                                                                                    respectively with n 2 >                                 m>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > n k > 1. Thus C contains an element of order n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Since p^A = 0, we have/? ni C - 0, whence    > n Since /toi is a cyclic fl-module of                            #1,                          2.


             REMARK. The following proof is quite elementary. A more elegant proof of (ii),                                                                                                                                                            order p n \ A is a direct sum of cyclic ^-modules of orders p n \p n \                                                                                                                                       nk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         respectively
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   p
which uses the concept of injectivity, is given in Exercise 7.                                                                                                                                                                                         with m > n 2 >                             •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          > nk >     1       .




             PROOF OF 6.8. (G. S. Monk) (i) If A ^ Ra, then there exists c s A — Ra.                                                                                                                                                                      Theorems 6.6, 6.7, and 6.9 immediately yield a structure theorem for finitely
Since p c £ p A = 0, there is a least positive integer j such that p c £ Ra, whence
                              n           n                                                                                                                                             j                                                              generated modules over a principal ideal domain (see Theorem 6.12(ii) below). Just
  ~
p c £ Ra and/7 c = na (n £ R). Since R is a unique factorization domain n = rp                                                                                                                                                                         as in the case of abelian groups (Section II. 2), there is a second way of decomposing
     j   l                                    ?
                                                                                    k

                                                                                ~                                                                                                                                                                      a finitely generated module as a direct sum of cyclic submodules. In order to obtain
for some k >          and r £ R such that pJfr. Consequently,       = p c = p (p c)
                                                                        n     n                                                                                                                                                       j        j



= p n ~ rp ka. Since p)(r and p n ~ a ^ (Theorem 6.4(v)), we must have n — j + k > n,
                          j                                            l                                                                                                                                                                               this second decomposition and to prove a uniqueness theorem about each of the de-
                                                  ~
whence k >j > 1. Therefore, b = p ~ c — rp k a is a well-defined element of A.              ]    l                        l                                                                                                                            compositions, we need two lemmas.
224                                                                             CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                                                                                    6.       MODULES OVER A PRINCIPAL IDEAL DOMAIN                                                                                   225



Lemma 6.10. Let A,B, and A                                                           {
                                                                                         (i   e I)   be modules over a principal ideal domain R.                                            Theorem 6.12. Let A be a finitely generated module over a principal ideal domain R.
Let r e R and let p e R 6e prime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (i)             A is the direct sum of a free submodule F offinite rank and a finite number of
                                                                                                                                                                                            cyclic torsion modules.                                                              The cyclic torsion summands (if any) are of orders n,                                         .       .       .       rt ,
               rA =            and A[r] = a e A ra =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,

        (i)                                        ra        an? submodules of A.
                                                                  a e A)                             (                                    j
                                               j             |                                                      |


                                                                                                                                                                                            where r                       T ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r t are (not necessarily distinct) nonzero nonunit elements                        ofR such that
       (ii) R/(p) is a field and A[p] is a vector space over R/(p).
                                                                                                                                                                                            ri   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                         r2       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •    •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rt          .       The rank ofF and the list of ideals (r0,           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (r t ) are uniquely determined
      (iii) For each positive integer n there are R-module isomorphisms
                                                                                                                                                                                            by A.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ii)             A is the direct sum of a free submodule E offinite rank and a finite number of
                       (R/(p n ))[p]                                      = R/(P) and p m (R/(p ^ R/(p ' m (0 < m < n).
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                    ))
                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                            cyclic torsion modules. The cyclic torsion summands (ifany) are of orders pi Sl ,           p k 8k                                                                     .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .       ,              ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                             p k are (not necessarily distinct) primes in R and Si,
      (iv)     If A                    ^               ieJ
                                                                  A   *>   then rA   = 2 rA   iel
                                                                                                          i   ^ AW =                      Z) A iW-
                                                                                                                                          ie.1
                                                                                                                                                                                            where pi,                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,               s k are {not

                                                                                                                                                                                            necessarily distinct) positive integers. The rank ofE and the list of ideals (pi 81 ),         Sk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,(pk )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •       •




                                                                                                                                                   A = B a^f A(p) ^ B(p).                   are uniquely determined by A (except for the order of the pi).
        (v)    //f                 :       A -> B /s                         R-module isomorphism, then f                                     :     t             t        :




      SKETCH OF PROOF, (ii) Exercise 2.4. (v) See Lemma II.2.5 (vii). (iii) The                                                                                                                          The notation r \r 2 1- \r means r divides r2 r 2 divides r3 etc. The elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t       Y           ,                              ,



                                                                                                                                                                                   n        ru              r in Theorem 6.12 are called the invariant factors of the module A just as in
first  example preceding Theorem 6.5 may be helpful.. Verify that (R/(p ))[p] is                                                                                                                     .   .    .       ,         t




generated as an /^-module (and hence as a vector space over R/(p)) by the single
                                                                                                                                                                                            the special case of abelian groups. Similarly p x s \                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,   p k sk are called the elementary
nonzero element p
                         '
                             + (p n ). Therefore, (R/(p n ))[p] R/(p) by Theorems 2.5 and
                                                                 71   1                                                               ~                                                     divisors of A.
                                                      m                        m      n
2.1. The submoduleof R/(p ) generated by p + (p ) is precisely p (R/(p )). Since
                                     n                         n

                                                                 n~ m
p
  m _j_ (^n) h as orcj er n-m^ we h ave p m (R/(p n ))
                           p                                R/(p      ) by Theorem 6.4(iii).                                ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.12. The existence of a direct sum decomposition
                                                                                                                                                                                            of the type described in (ii) is an immediate consequence of Theorems 6.6, 6.7, and
                                                                                                                                                                                            6.9. Thus A is the direct sum of a free module and a finite family of cyclic /^-modules,

Lemma 6.11. Le/ R be a principal ideal domain. Ifr e R factors as r = pi     pk
                                                                                nk                                                                                             ni   -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                            each of which has order a power of a prime. In the case of abelian groups these prime
with p],  pk e R distinct primes and each nj > 0, then there is an
               .   .       .
                                   ,
                                                                    R-module iso-                                                                                                           powers are precisely the elementary divisors of A. The method of calculating the in-
morphism                                                                                                                                                                                    variant factors of an abelian group from its elementary divisors (see pp. 80-81) may
                                                                                                                                                                                            be used here, mutatis mutandis, to prove the existence of a direct sum decompo-
                                                                            R/(r)   ^ R/(pi          n
                                                                                                         »)   ©• •© R/(Pk nk
                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                        ).
                                                                                                                                                                                            sition of A of the type described in (i). One need only make the following modifica-

Consequently every cyclic R-module of order r is a direct sum ofk cyclic R-modules of
                                                                                                                                                                                            tions. The role of                                                         Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pn =. Z/(/? ) (p £ Z prime) is played by a cyclic torsion submodule
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n

                                                                                                                                                                                            of A of order p n (p e R prime). Such a cyclic torsion module is isomorphic to R/(p n )
orders pi ni           ,       .       .   .           pk nk respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                                            by Theorem 6.4(iii). Lemma II. 2. 3 is replaced by Lemma 6.11.
                                                   ,




      SKETCH OF PROOF. We shall prove that if s,t e R are relatively prime, then                                                                                                                The proof of the uniqueness of the direct sum decompositions in (i) and (ii) is
R/(st)        ^ R/(s) © R/(t). The                                                  first     part of the lemma then follows by induction on
                                                                                                                                                                                            essentially the  same as the proof of the corresponding facts for abelian groups
the number of distinct primes in the prime decomposition of r. The last statement of
                                                                                                                                                                                            (Theorem II. 2. 6). The following modifications of the argument are necessary.
the lemma is an immediate consequence of the fact that R/(c) is a cyclic /^-module of
                                                                                                                                                                                            First of all prime factorization in R is unique only up to multiplication by a unit
order c for each c e R by Theorem 6.4. The map 6                                                                                      :       R —> R given by xf— tx is an     >
                                                                                                                                                                                            (Definition III.3.5 and Theorem III. 3. 7). This causes no difficulty in Z since the only
^-module monomorphism that takes the ideal (s) onto the ideal (st). By Corollary 1 .8
                                                                                                                                                                                            units are ±1 and primes are defined to be positive. In an arbitrary principal ideal
  induces an /^-module homomorphism R/(s) — > R/(st) given by x + (s) h> tx + (s/).
                                                                                                                                                                                            domain R, however, an element a £ R may have order p and order q with p,q distinct
Similarly there is a homomorphism R/(t) — /?/(s/) given by x +               +                                                                                                              primes. However, since (p) =      a = (<?), p and q are associates by Theorem III. 3.2;
By the proof of Theorem 1.13 the map a R/(s)              R/(t) -> /?/(*') given by                                         :
                                                                                                                                              ©                                             that is, q = pu with u £ Ra unit. Hence the uniqueness statements in (i) and (ii) deal
(x + (*),>> + (0)H>     + ^y] + (st) is a well-defined ^-module homomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 5* R and that a
                                                                                                                                                                                            with ideals rather than elements. Note that a          implies that
Since (5,/) = U, there exist u,v e R such that su + tu = \ R (Theorem IIL3.11). If
                                                                                                                                                                                            cyclic module Ra is free if and only if ©„ = (0). Thus the elements u in (i) are non-
c e R, then c = sue + /w\ whence a(^c + (j),      + (/)) = c + (st). Therefore, a is                                                                                                        zero nonunits. Other modifications: as above replace each finite cyclic summand
an epimorphism. In order to show that a is a monomorphism we must show that
                                                                                                                                                                                            Zn ^ Z/(n) with n >        1 by a cyclic torsion module R/(r) (r e R a nonzero nonunit).

                                                                                                                                                                                            Replace the subgroup generated by the infinite cyclic summands Z by a free
                                                       a(x            + W, y + (/)) =                         =>            x £ (5)            and           >>   £ (/).
                                                                                                                                                                                            /^-module of finite rank. Use Lemmas 6.10 and 6.11 in place of Lemmas II.2.3 and
                                                                                                                                                                                            II. 2. 5. Instead of the counting argument on p. 79 (showing that r = d) use the fact
If a(x    + (5), y + (0) = 0, then tx + sy = stb £ (5/) for some b b R. Hence w/x + usy
= W5/Z>. But>^ =         = (sw + tv)y, whence utx + (y — tvy) = ustb and y = ustb —                                                                                                         that A[p] is a vector space over R/(p). Hence the number of summands R/(p) is pre-

utx     + tvy £ (0- A similar argument shows that x £ (s).                                                                                                                                  cisely d\m R /( P )A[p], which is invariant by Theorem 2.7.
226                                              CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                             7.   ALGEBRAS                                      227



Corollary 6.13. Two finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain, A and                              Definition 7.1. Let              K be a commutative ring with identity. A K-algebra {or algebra
B, are isomorphic ifand only //A/A t and B/B t have the same rank and A and B have                               over K) A is a ring A such that:

the same invariant factors [resp. elementary divisors].
                                                                                                                        (i)       (A,-h) is a unitary (left) K-module;
                                                                                                                       (ii)       k(ab) = (ka)b = a(kb) for all k e    K and a,b   e A.
      PROOF. Exercise.
                                                                                                                       A K-algebra A which, as a ring, is a division ring, is called a division algebra.

                                                     EXERCISES                                                         The classical theory of algebras deals with algebras over a field K. Such an
      Note: Unless stated otherwise, R is a principal ideal domain and all modules are                           algebra is a vector space over  K and hence various results of linear algebra are ap-
unitary.                                                                                                         plicable.            An algebra over a field K that is finite dimensional as a vector space over K
                                                                                                                 is   called a finite dimensional algebra over K.
1 .   IfR is a nonzero commutative ring with identity and every submodule of every free
      7?-module is free, then R is a principal ideal domain. [Hint: Every ideal / of R is a                            EXAMPLE. Every ring R is an additive abelian group and hence a Z-module. It
      free 7?-module. If u,v e / (u ^ 0,v ^ 0), then uv + (-v)u = 0, which implies that
                                                                                                                 is   easy to see that R is actually a Z-algebra.
      / has a basis of one element; that is, / is principal.]

2.    Every free module over an arbitrary integral domain with identity is torsion-free.                            EXAMPLES. If K is a commutative ring with identity, then the polynomial ring
      The converse is false (Exercise II. 1.10).                                                                 K[x u   .x n and the power series ring K[[x]] are AT-algebras, with the respective
                                                                                                                              .   .   ,   ]


                                                                                                                 ^-module structures given in the usual way.
3.    Let A be a cyclic /^-module of order r e R.
        (a) If s e R is relatively prime to r, then sA = A and A[s] = 0.                                           EXAMPLE. If V is a vector space over a field F, then the endomorphism ring
        (b) If s divides r, say sk = r, then sA                  ^
                                                    R/(k) and A[s]   R/(s).           ^                          Hom F {V,V) (Exercise 1.7) is an F-algebra. The F-module structure of Hom F (V,V) is
                                                                                                                 discussed in the Remark after Theorem 4.8.
4. If   A is a cyclic /^-module of order r, then (i) every submodule of A is cyclic, with
      order dividing r (ii) for every ideal (s) containing (r), A has exactly one submodule,
                                    ;


      which is cyclic of order s.
                                                                                                                    EXAMPLES. Let A be a ring with identity and K a subring of the center of A
                                                                                                                 such that 1^^. Then A is a ^-algebra, with the ^-module structure being given by
5.    If A          is    a finitely generated torsion module, then [r e R        \
                                                                                      rA = 0}   is   a nonzero   multiplication in A. In particular, every commutative ring                      K with identity is a
      ideal in 7?, say (n).              ri is                          A be a finite
                                                 called the minimal annihilator of A. Let                        ^-algebra.
      abelian group with minimal annihilator m e Z. Show that a cyclic subgroup of A
      of order properly dividing m need not be a direct summand of A.                                                  EXAMPLE. Both the field of complex numbers C and the division ring of real
                                                                                                                 quaternions (p. 117) are division algebras over the field R of real numbers.
6. If   A and # are cyclic modules over R of nonzero orders r and 5 respectively, and r
      is«o/ relatively prime to s, then the invariant factors of A  B are the greatest                                 EXAMPLE. Let G be a multiplicative group and K a commutative ring with
      common divisor of r,s and the least common multiple of r,s.                                                identity. Then the group ring K(G) (p. 117) is actually a tf-algebra with                 /f-module
                                                                                                                 structure given by
7.    Let A and a e A satisfy the hypotheses of Lemma 6.8.
        (a) Every /^-submodule of A is an R/(p )-modu\e with (r
                                                n
                                                                                       + (pn))a = ra. Con-                                                 =                (k,n e K; gi e G).
      versely,                          n
                              every R/(p ) -submodule of     A   is   an /^-submodule by pullback along
      R -> */(/>«).                                                                                              K(G) is called the group algebra of G over K.
              (b) The submodule Ra is isomorphic to R/(p n ).
                                                           n
              (c) The only proper ideals of the ring R/(p ) are the ideals generated by
                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. If AT is a commutative ring with identity, then the ring Mat n /f of all
      P
          i
              +     <J>
                          n
                              )0= 1,2,..., n- 1).                                                                n    Xn matrices over K
                                                                                                                                       is a ^-algebra with the ^-module action of                      K given in the
                                                                                                                 usual way. More generally, if A is a tf-algebra, then so is Mat >4.
              (d)    R/(p n ) (and hence /to) is an injective /?/(/? n )-module. [///«/: use (c) and                                                                                             n

      Lemma 3.8.]
              (e)    There exists an /^-submodule C of A such that A = /to              ©   C. [////if: Propo-
                                                                                                                    REMARK. Since K is commutative, every left AT-module (and hence every
                                                                                                                 ^-algebra) A is also a right K module with ka = ak for all a e A, k e K. This fact is
      sition 3.13.]
                                                                                                                 implicitly assumed in Theorems 7.2 and 7.4 below, where tensor products are used.


                                                                                                                      The motivation for the next theorem, which provides another means of defining
7.    ALGEBRAS                                                                                                                                        R the unique map R (x) z R —> R, defined on
                                                                                                                 AT algebras, is the fact that for any ring
                                                                                                                 a generator r(x)i by r(x)^h rs, is a homomorphism of additive abelian groups.
    Algebras are introduced and their basic properties developed. Tensor products
                                                                                                                 Since rings are simply Z-algebras, this fact is a special case of
are used extensively in this discussion. Algebras will be studied further in Chapter IX.
228                                          CHAPTER IV MODULES                                                                                                       7.       ALGEBRAS                                                                                          229



Theorem 7.2. Let K be a commutative ring with identity and A a unitary left                                       Therefore, if A has an identity, every (left, right, two-sided) ideal is also a (left, right,
K-module. Then A is a K-algebra ifand only if there exists a K-module homomorphism                                two-sided) algebra ideal.

7r   :       A (X) K A —- A such that the diagram                                                                    The quotient algebra of a ^-algebra A by an algebra ideal / is now defined in the
                                                                                                                  obvious way, as are the direct product and direct sum of a family of ^-algebras.

                                     A®K A®K A T ® U> A ®k A                                                         Tensor products furnish another way fo manufacture new algebras. We first
                                                                                                                  observe that if A and B are ^-modules, then there is a ^-module isomorphism
                                               ju(x)7r                                                            a:A®K B->B ®K A such that a(a ® b) = b ® a (a A,b B); see Exercise                                e                       e                                    2.


                                             A® K A                         -^A
                                                                                                                  Theorem 7.4. Let A and B be algebras [with identity] over a commutative ring K with
is commutative.             In this case the K-algebra           A has an identity if and only if there is a      identity. Let t be the composition

K-module homomorphism I                      K — A such that the diagram
                                                 >


                                                                                                                             ®k B)® K (A0kB)^B (A® k A)(X) K (B ® k B)^>B A(X) K B,
                                         :


                                                                                                                        (A

                                             K® K A±A+A®K K                                                       where ir A t b are the product maps of
                                                                                                                                ,                                               A
                                                                                                                                                             and B respectively. Then                                                               A ® K B is a K-
                                                                                                                  algebra [with identity] with product map t,
                                                     1®\a                  1a®1
                                             A(x) K       A+A+-A®K A
                                                                                                                     PROOF. Exercise; note that for generators a                                  ® b and a ® b of A ®K B the   x                   x


                                                                                                                  product is defined to be


is commutative,             where f ,0 are the isomorphisms of Theorem 5.7.
                                                                                                                                      (a   ®    b)(a x   ®   bi)   = ir(a      ® b ® ® bj = aa ® bb
                                                                                                                                                                                         ai                                     x                       x .




                                                                                                                  Thus if A and B have identities 1 A                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                           1            then
                                                                                                                                                                               B respectively, ® B                          1A                  1         is   the identity
             SKETCH OF PROOF. If A is a ^-algebra, then the map A X A -> A given                                  in    A®K B.
by (a,b)               ab is ^-bilinear, whence there is a ^-module homomorphism

                                                 7T   :   A   ®K A —> A                                              The ^-algebra A             ®
                                                                                                                                         K B of Theorem 7.4 is called the tensor product of the K-
                                                                                                                  algebras A and B. Tensor products of algebras are useful in studying the structure of
by Theorem 5.6. Verify that it has the required properties. If A has an identity 1 A                          ,   division algebras over a field              K (Section IX. 6).
then the map /  K-+ A given by k H k\ A is easily seen to be a ^-module homo-
                            :




morphism with the required properties. Conversely, given A and the map
7T       :   A   ®K A —+ A,     define ab = w(a      ®    b) and verify that A is a ^-algebra. If / :   K— A
                                                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                                                    EXERCISES
is also given, then 1(1 k) is an identity for A.
                                                                                                                        Note: K is always a commutative ring with identity.

             The homomorphism ir of Theorem 7.2 is called the product map of the ^-algebra                        1 .   Let C be the category whose objects are all commutative ^-algebras with identity
A. The homomorphism / is called the unit map.                                                                           and whose morphisms are all ^-algebra homomorphisms f:A-*B such that
                                                                                                                        RIa) = 1b. Then any two ^-algebras A, B of C have a coproduct. [Hint: consider
                                                                                                                        A-+A<g) K B<- B, where a\-+ a® 1 B and b\-+ 1 A                                    ®        b.]

 Definition 7.3. Let              K be a commutative ring with identity and A, B K-algebras.                      2.    IfA and B are unitary ^-modules [resp. ^-algebras], then there is an isomorphism
              (i)  A subalgebra of A is a subring of A that is also a K-submodule of A.                                 of ^-modules [resp. ^-algebras] a A
                                                                                                                        = b®aior all aaA,beB.
                                                                                                                                                                   K B -> B          ®
                                                                                                                                                                               K A such that a(a
                                                                                                                                                                                 :                    b)       ®                                                         ®
              (ii) A (left, right, two-sided) algebra ideal of A is a (left, right, two-sided) ideal of

the ring             A that is also a K-submodule of A.                                                           3.    Let A be a ring with identity. Then A is a ^-algebra with identity if and only if
             (iii)   A homomorphism [resp. isomorphism] of K-algebras f A — B is a ring ho-
                                                                                        :    >


momorphism [isomorphism] that is also a K-module homomorphism [isomorphism].
                                                                                                                        there is a ring homomorphism of                        K into the center of A such that lj^ —                                                |   >   1   A   .




                                                                                                                  4.    Let A be a one-dimensional vector space over the rational field Q. If we define
             REMARKS. If A is a ^-algebra, an ideal of the ring A need not be an algebra                                ab = for all a,b e A, then A is a Q-algebra. Every proper additive subgroup of A
ideal of A (Exercise 4). If, however, A has an identity, then for all k e                        K and a e A            is an ideal of the ring A, but not an algebra ideal.



                           ka = k(l A a) = (k\ A )a           and   ka = (ka)\ A = a(kl A ),                      5.                                          X is the set
                                                                                                                        Let C be the category of Exercise 1. If               ...,*„}, then the poly-
                                                                                                                        nomial algebra K[x u ...,*„] is a free object on the set X in the category e.
with kl A e A. Consequently, for a left [resp. right] ideal J in the ring A,                                            [Hint: Given an algebra A in e and a map g    Xx     x n -> A, apply Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                          :
                                                                                                                                                                                              {    ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,            ]



                                 kJ = (kl A )J   dJ           [resp. kJ   = J(kl A ) C J].                              III. 5. 5 to the unit   map 1    :          A and the elements g(xi),                           .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,   g(x n ) e A.]
                                                                                                                                        1.   FIELD EXTENSIONS                                      231




                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                      2



                                 CHAPTER            V
FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY

                                                                                           A broken arrow A                     >B indicates that an occasional result from section A is used in
                                                                                           section B, but that section B is essentially independent of section A. See page xviii
                                                                                           for a description of a short basic course in fields and Galois theory.




                                                                                           1.     FIELD EXTENSIONS
The first principal theme of this chapter is the structure theory of fields. We shall
study a field F in terms of a specified subfield K (F is said to be an extension field        The basic facts needed for the study of field extensions are presented first,
of K). The basic facts about field extensions are developed in Section 1, in particular,   followed by a discussion of simple extensions. Finally a number of essential proper-
the distinction between algebraic and transcendental extensions. For the most part         ties       of algebraic extensions are proved. In the appendix, which is not used in the
we deal only with algebraic extensions in this chapter. Arbitrary field extensions are     sequel, several famous geometric problems of antiquity are settled, such as the tri-
considered in Chapter VI. The structure of certain fields and field extensions is          section of an angle by ruler and compass constructions.
thoroughly analyzed: simple extensions (Section 1); splitting fields (normal exten-
sions)   and algebraic closures (Section 3); finite fields (Section 5); and separable
algebraic extensions (Sections 3 and 6).                                                   Definition 1.1. A field F is said to be an extension field ofK (or simply an extension
      The Galois theory of field extensions (the other main theme of this chapter) had     ofK) provided that K is a subfield ofF.
its   historical origin in a classical problem in the theory of equations, which is dis-
cussed in detail in Sections 4 and 9. Various results of Galois theory have important             If   F is an extension field of K, then it is easy to see that \ K = If- Furthermore, F
applications, especially in the study of algebraic    numbers (see E. Artin [48]) and      is   a vector space over             K (Definition IV. 1.1). Throughout this chapter the dimension
algebraic geometry (see S. Lang [54]).                                                     of the AT-vector space F will be denoted by [F                 :   K] rather than dim^Fas previously. F
      The key idea of Galois theory is to relate a field extension K C F to the group of   is   said to be a finite dimensional extension or infinite dimensional extension of                         K
all automorphisms of Fthat fix    K elementwise (the Galois group of the extension). A     according as [F            :   K] is finite or infinite.
Galois field extension may be defined in terms of its Galois group (Section 2) or in
terms of the internal structure of the extension (Section 3). The Fundamental Theo-
rem of Galois theory (Section 2) states that there is a one-to-one correspondence
                                                                                            Theorem 1.2. Let F be an extension field ofE and E an extension field ofK. Then
between the intermediate fields of a (finite dimensional) Galois field extension and
                                                                                            [F K] = [F E][E K]. Furthermore [F K] is finite if and only //[F E] and [E K]
                                                                                                  :               :         :                         :                                 :          :


the subgroups of the Galois group of the extension. This theorem allows us to trans-
                                                                                            are finite.
late properties and problems involving fields, polynomials, and field extensions into
group theoretic terms. Frequently, the corresponding problem in groups has a solu-
                                                                                                      PROOF. This is a restatement of Theorem IV.2.16.
tion, whence the original problem in field theory can be solved. This is the case, for
instance, with the classical problem in the theory of equations mentioned in the pre-
vious paragraph. We shall characterize those Galois field extensions whose Galois
                                                                                                      In the situation K         C E C F of Theorem 1.2, E         is said to be   an intermediate field
                                                                                            of K and F.
groups are finite cyclic (Section 7) or solvable (Section 9).
      The approximate interdependence of the sections of this chapter is as follows:
                                                                                                      If   F is a field and X C F, then the subfield [resp. subring] generated by X is the
                                                                                            intersection of all subfields [resp. subrings] of F that contain X. If       F is an extension
                                           230
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •




232                                                                                CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.       FIELD EXTENSIONS                                       "                   ^

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                              233



field of           K and X C F, then the subfield [resp. subring] generated by K U X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is called                  Therefore, E is a group under addition (Theorem 1.2.5). Similarly the nonzero ele-

the subfield [resp. subring] generated by                                                                                                                                                                                X over K and is denoted K(X) [resp. K[X]].                                                                                                                                                                                                        ments of E form a group under multiplication, whence E is a field. Since X CZ Fand
Note that K[X] is necessarily an integral domain.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KCZE, we have K(X) CZ E. Therefore, K(X) = E. (vii) If u z K(X), then by (vi)
      If A
               r
                       = {«],..., u n }, then the subfield                                                                                                                                                                                                               [resp. subring                                                                                                                    of F is denoted                                                 u = f(u u  u ,)/g(u u   w„) £ AXA'O, where A' =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,       7   uu       u n CI X.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       }




#(«i, ...,«») [resp.                                                                                                           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                               ,        «„]]. The field #(«i,                                                                                                    .           .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w n ) is said to be a finitely
generated extension of K(buX it need not be finite dimensional over K; see Exercise 2).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        If L and                    M are subfields of a                              field F, the composite of L and                                                M       in F,                denoted          LM
If   X
     = {«}, then #(«) is said to be a simple extension of       A routine verification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     is the subfield                    U M. An immediate consequence of this defini-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               generated by the set L
shows that neither K(u u           u n ) nor K[u u ...,«„] depends on the order of the u                               .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                           ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {   tion is that LM = L(M) = M(L). It is easy to show that if AT is a subfield of L D M

and that K(u u     w n _i)(« n ) = K(ui,   .   ,u n ) and K[u u
                                                .      .         w„_i][w n = #[wi, ...,«„]
                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .    .   .                                                                                                   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .    ,                                                       ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           such that M - K(S) where 5" CZ M, then LM = L(S) (Exercise 5). The relationships
(Exercise 4). These facts will be used frequently in the sequel without explicit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of the dimensions [L K), [M K], [LM K], etc. are considered in Exercises 20-21.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :                   :                             :




mention.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The composite of any finite number of subfields EU E        En is defined to be the                                                 2,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           subfield generated by the set E U E, U       U En and is denoted F F           Ev (see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     }    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   •




      NOTATION. If F is a field u,v s F, and                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i?          ^ 0, then wir s F will sometimes be                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Exercise 5).
denoted by u/ v.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The next step in the study of field extensions is to distinguish two fundamentally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           different situations that occur.


Theorem 1.3. IfF is an extension field of a field K, u, Ui e F, and X C F, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Definition 1.4. Let F be an extension field ofK. An element u ofF is said to be
         (i)           the subring K[u] consists of all elements of the form f(u), where f is a poly-
nomial with coefficients in K (that is, f e K[x]);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           algebraic orer                          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             prodded that u is a root of some nonzero polynomial f £ K[x]. // u is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           not a root of any nonzero f e K[x], u is said to be transcendental over K. F is called an
    (ii) the subring K[ui,     u m consists ofall elements of the form g(ui,u 2                                    .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                       ,                        ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,       .    .    .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u m ),
                                                                                                                                                                        m inde terminates with coefficients in K (that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     algebraic extension ofK if every element ofF is algebraic over K. F is called a trans-
where g                    is          a polynomial                                                                                            in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cendental extension // at least one element ofF is transcendental over K.
g*K[x u          x m ]);
                       •   •       •   ,


    (iii) the subring K[X] consists of all elements of the form h(u u      u n ), where each                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REMARKS. If u e AT, then u is a root of .v — u £ K[x] and therefore algebraic
Ui e X, n is a positive integer, andh is a polynomial in n indeterminates with coefficients
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           over K. If u s F is algebraic over some subfield K' of K, then u is algebraic over K
in    K (that                  is,         n e N*, h e K[xi,                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    x n ]);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           since K'[x] CI K[x]. If u £ F is a root of fe K[x] with leading coefficient c                                                                                                                 ^ 0, then u
      (iv)             the subfield K(u) consists of all elements of the form f(u)/g(u)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = f(u)g(u) _1                                      ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is also a root of c~ f,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               which is a monic polynomial in K[x]. A transcendental extension
where f,g e K[x] and g(u) ^ 0;
                                                                                                                                                                   u m ) consists of all elements of the form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           may contain elements that are algebraic over K (in addition to the elements of K
         (v) the subfield'K(ui,                                                                                        .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                           ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           itself).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _1
                           h(ui,               .       .           .
                                                                               ,
                                                                                           u,„)/k(ui,                                                              .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    u m ) = h(ui,                                                            .   .           .           ,           u m )k(ui,                                   .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u m)                     ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EXAMPLES. Let Q,R and C be the fields of rational, real, and complex numbers
where h,k e K[xi,                                              .               .           .                   x m ] and k(ui,                                                                          .   .    .               u m ) ^ 0;
                                                                                                   ,                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           respectively. Then / sC is algebraic over Q and hence over R; in fact, C = R(z'). It is
      (vi)             the subfield K(X) consists of all elements of the form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a nontrivial fact that w, e £ R are transcendental over Q; see, for instance, I. Her-
                                       f(ui,                   .           .           .
                                                                                                   ,       U„)/g(Ui,                                                    .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                            u n ) = f(ui,                                                    .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u„)g(ui,                                     .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               u,,)"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           stein [4].


where n e N*, f,g e K[xi,                                                                                                  .           .               .
                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                        x n ], Ui,                                   .       .           .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u n e X and g(ui,                                                                                .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u n)                 ^ 0.                                               EXAMPLE. If AT is a field, then the polynomial ring K[x u ...,*„] is an integral
        For each v e K(X) (resp. K[X]) //zen? /j a /z/iz7e swfoe/ X' o/X such that
      (vii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           domain (Theorem                                                          The quotient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               III. 5. 3).                                                        field       of    K[x u ...,*„]                                         is           denoted
v e K(X') (resp. K[X']).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K(x u   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,       Xn ). It consists of all fractions f'g, with fig £ K\x u ...,*„] and g                                                                                                      ^ 0, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the usual addition and multiplication (see Theorem III.4.3). K(x                                                                        x n ) is called
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u
    SKETCH OF PROOF, (vi) Every field that contains K and A' must contain the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the field of rational functions in x u                                                 .   .   .       x n over K. In the field extension
set  E = f(u     u n )/g(u u ,u n
                               {
                                       n £ N*; fig e K[x,,
                                               x ,             . x }; m e X;
                                                                           .           .
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                            .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,               v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,




g(u u     .   .    .
                       ,   Un)                         0}     whence K(X) Z> F. Conversely, if
                                                                           ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fig £                                                             .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            xm            ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and                                                                                        K c K(x\, ...,x n                            )

fu gi £ K[x\,                      .   .   .
                                                ,      x n ], then define h,k £ Afci, xm+71 by                                                                                                                                                       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                   ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           each Xi             is          easily seen              to be transcendental over K.                                                        In fact, every element of
                                           h(x u                                   .           .           .
                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                   X m +n) = f(Xi,                                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Xm )gi(xm+ i,                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Xm+n )                                                                                                               K(x\,   .  x n ) not in K itself is transcendental over K (Exercise 6).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



                                                                                                                                                                                            — g(Xi,                                  .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A- TO )/i(jr TO+ i,                                                  .       .   .       ,       Xm+n);                                                                                                   In the next two theorems we shall characterize all simple field extensions up to

                                           k(Xi,                                   .           .           .       Xm+n) = g(Xl,                                                                                 .       .       .                   Xm )g\(Xm+U                                                         •       •   •        ,       Xm +n)                                                                                                               isomorphism.
                                                                                                               ,                                                                                                                             ,




Then for any «i,                                       .           .       .,                  um v u          ,
                                                                                                                                       .           .
                                                                                                                                                           .       ,    f n s A' such thatg(«i,                                                                                                  .           .       .       ,u m ) ^ 0,gi(i?i,                                                                         .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t>   n)       ^ 0,
                           f(u u                                                   ,um )                                               f(v u                                                                                                             h(u u                                                       u m ,v\,                                                     ,v n )
                                                   .       .           .

                                                                                                                   —                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            , Vn)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =                                           .       .       .           ,                                        .       .       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               £ tL.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 1.5. If F is an extension field ofK and u e F is transcendental over K, then
                           g(Ui,                .          .           .           ,U m )                                                  gl(V h                                   .       .       .       ,V n )                                       k(Ui,                       .   .           .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Um ,Vi,                          .       .       .           ,V n )                                                                                   there is an isomorphism offields K(u)                                                          = K(x) which                        is    the identity on K.
                              l                                                                    1                                                         l




234                                                                  CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                        1.              FIELD EXTENSIONS                                                            235



      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since u is transcendental f(u) 9* 0, g{u) 5* for all                                                                                                                                                       The following example illustrates how Theorem 1.6 and the techniques of its
                                         K(x) — F given by f/gY^ f(u)/g(u)
nonzero fig e K[x]. Consequently, the map <p                                                                                      :                      >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               proof may be used for specific computations.
= f(u)g(u)~ is a well-defined monomorphism of fields which is the identity on K.
                                      l



But Im <p = AT(V) by Theorem 1.3, whence K(x) = K(u).                                                                                                                                                                               EXAMPLE. The polynomial x* - 3* -                                                                 1   is   irreducible       over   Q (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               III. 6. 6 and Proposition III. 6.8) and has real root u (Exercise III. 6.1 6(d)).                                                        By Theorem
Theorem 1.6. //F /s a« extension field ofK and ue F is algebraic over K, r/z£7z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.6 u       has degree 3 over                             Q and \l,u,u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q. The element      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \   is   a basis of Q(u) over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w 4 + 2u z + 3 £ Q(u) = Q[u] may be expressed as a linear combination (over Q) of
        (i)           K(u) = K[u];                                                                                                                                                                                             the basis elements as follows. The division algorithm (that is, ordinary long division)
       (ii)           K(u)                =
                             K[x]/(f), where f e K[x] is an irreducible monic polynomial of degree                                                                                                                             in the ring Q[x] shows that
n >     1     uniquely determined by the conditions that f(u)                                                                                        =                 and g(u) =                  (g e K[x]) if
and only iff divides g;                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x 4 + 2x* + 3 = (x + 2)(x 3 - 3x - 1) + (3x 2 + Ix + 5),
   (iii) [K(u):K] = n;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               whence
   (iv)    K ,u,u 2     u n_1 is a basis of the vector space K(u) over K;
                          (                             ,   .    .   .
                                                                         ,                 |



    (v) every element o/K(u) can be written uniquely in the form a + aiu +                                                                                                                                   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +                   + 2« + 3 = (u + 2)(u* - 3« - 1) + (3« + lu + 5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      «4                   3                                                                           2


an-iu""           1
                              (aj e K).                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =    + 2)0 + (3« + 7« + 5)          (11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = 3w + lu + 5.                               2

      PROOF, (i) and(ii) The map <p    K[x] — K[u] given by g\-+ g{u) is a nonzero                               :            >


ring epimorphism by Theorems III. 5. 5. and 1.3. Since K[x] is a principal ideal                                                                                                                                               The multiplicative inverse of 3« + lu -f 5 in Q(w) may be calculated as follows.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2



domain (Corollary III. 6.4), Ker <p = (/) for some fe K[x] with f(u) = 0. Since u is                                                                                                                                           Since x 3 — 3x              —   1           is        irreducible                in   Q[jc],           the polynomials            x 3 — 3x — 1 and
algebraic, Ker <p ^  and since <p ^ 0, Ker <p ^ K[x]. Hence f 5*     and deg /> 1.                                                                                                                                             3* 2 -f 7*        + 5 are relatively prime in Q[x]. Consequently, by Theorem III. 3. 11 there
Furthermore, if c is the leading coefficient of /, then c is a unit in K[x] (Corollary                                                                                                                                         exist g(x), h(x) e Q[x] such that
         -1                          -1
           /is monic, and (/) = (c /) (Theorem III. 3. 2). Consequently we may
III. 6.4), c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cx-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - 3* - l)gW + (3x + 7x + 5)/z(j0 = 1.      2

assume that /is monic. By the First Isomorphism Theorem (Corollary III. 2. 10),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Therefore, since u z             — 3« —                        =                we have
                                                                         K[x]/(f) = K[x]/Ker <p                                   ^ Im          <p           = K[u\.                                                                                                                      1




Since K[u] is an integral domain, the ideal (/) is prime in K[x] by Theorem III.2.16.                                                                                                                                                                                                + 7« + 5)h(u) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (3« 2                                            1


Theorem III. 3.4 implies that /is irreducible and hence that the ideal (/) is maximal.                                                                                                                                         so that               e Q[«] is         the inverse of 3« + 7u + 5. The polynomials g and h may be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2

Consequently, K[x]/(f) is a field (Theorem III. 2. 20). Since K(u) is the smallest                                                                                                                                             explicitly computed via the Euclidean algorithm (Exercise III. 3. 13): g(x)                                                               = -l/31x
subfield of F containing K and u and since K(u)    K[u]    K[x]/(f), we must have                                                         3                       =                                                            + 29/111, and h{x) = 7/111 x - 26/111 x + 28/111. Hence h(u) = 7/111 u -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                   2

K(u) = K[u}. The uniqueness of /follows from the facts that /is monic and                                                                                                                                                      26/111  + 28/111.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11



                                                        g(u)             =                     <^=>    g e Ker <p = (f)                       <^=>               /divides g.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Suppose E is an extension field of K, F is an extension field of L, and a # — L is                                                               >
                          Every element of K(u) = K[u] is of the form g(u) for some g £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :

      (iv)                                                                by Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an isomorphism of fields. A recurrent question in the study of field extensions is:
rem 1.3. The division algorithm shows that g = cj /+ with </,/z £      and deg h <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               under what conditions can a be extended to an isomorphism of E onto F. In other
deg Therefore, g(u) =
    /                   /(«) +     /*(«) =    /z(«) = h(u) = b -{- biu +      b um                                            +                                                                          +
                                                                                  <:/(«)                                                                                         Q                                   rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               words, is there an isomorphism r     Fsuch that r A: = <j? We shall answer this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               £—
with m < n = deg / Thus                                                                                                  « n ~M spans the AT-vector space K(u). To see
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |




                          A ,«,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               question now for simple extension fields and in so doing obtain criteria for two
                                                                                               {         .   .   .
                                                                                                                     ,



that {1a-,«,                          •    •
                                                ,
                                                             n
                                                            " ~M                 is       linearly independent over                             # and hence a basis, suppose                                                   simple extensions K(u) and K{v) to be isomorphic (also see Exercise 16).

                                                                      «o         +        aiu -\                 h                    =                      (fl t £
                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                         K).                                                        Recall that if a               :       R — S is an isomorphism of rings, then the map R[x]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >                                                                                                 S[x]

                                                                                                                             has u as a root and has degree < n —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               given by              ^'H^Z °"O0-^                             is       also a ring isomorphism (Exercise III. 5.1). Clearly
Then # = a                                + a\x +                            •        •
                                                                                          + fl^ix       71-1
                                                                                                                 £                                                                                                        1.                     i                     i


Since /               |       # by (ii) and deg / = n, we must have g = 0; that is, a; =                                                                                                    for all /, whence                  this map extends a.              We shall denote the extended map R[x] -> S[*] by a also and the
                                           ~l                                                                                                                                                                                  image of /e                 by a-/.
(   U-,",     .           .   •
                                  ,
                                      un            \       is       linearly independent. Therefore,                                                (           A ,w,   .   .   •
                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                         " n "M   is   a basis of
*(«).
      (iii)               is      an immediate consequence of (iv). The equivalence of (iv) and (v) is a
routine exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                                              Theorem 1.8. L<?/ 0-                            :   K— L^                        isomorphism offields, u ^« element of some ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tension field ofK and v an element of some extension field ofL. Assume either

Definition 1.7. Let F be an extension field ofK and u s F algebraic over K. 77zp                                                                                                                                                     (i)   u is transcendental over                                K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and v is transcendental over L or                                                     ;



monic irreducible polynomial f 0/ Theorem 1 .6 is called the irreducible (or minimal or                                                                                                                                             (ii)   u is a root of an irreducible polynomial f s K[x] and v is a root of af s L[x].
minimum) polynomial of u. The degree of u over K is deg f = [K(u) K].                                                                                                                       :                                  777 ^a?   a extends to an isomorphism offields K(u)                                                        ^ L(v) which maps u cw/o            v.
236                                           CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.           FIELD EXTENSIONS                                                                                                                                                                              237


    SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) By the remarks preceding the theorem a extends to                                                                         field (Theorem III.2.20). Furthermore, the canonical projection tt                                                                                                                                                                                                       :       K[x] — > K[x]/(f)
an isomorphism K[x]                               =
                        L[x]. Verify that this map in turn extends to an isomorphism                                                               = F, when restricted to K, is a monomorphism (since is the only constant in a
K(x)^>L(x) given by h/g (- ah/ag. Therefore, by Theorem 1.5 we have K(u)                                                                     ^     maximal ideal of K[x]). Thus F contains w(K) ^ K, and therefore may be considered
^(jc) = L(x) = L(v). The composite map extends a and maps u onto v.                                                                                                       K (providing that K is identified with w(K) under the iso-
                                                                                                                                                   as an extension field of
      (ii)      It suffices           to assume that /is monic. Since a                                :   K[x]       = L[x] this implies that     morphism). For x £ K[x], let u = w(x) £ F. Verify that F = K(u) and that f(u) =
afe L[x] is monic irreducible. By the proof of Theorem 1.6 the maps                                                                                in F. Theorem 1.6 implies statement (ii) and Corollary 1.9 gives (iii).


                    <P   :       K[x]/( f) -> K[u] = K(u) and *                               :   L[x]/(af)   - L[v] = L(v),                             In the remainder of this section we shall develop the essential basic facts about
given respectively by <f[g           + (/)] = g(u) and \p[h + (af)] = h(v), are isomorphisms.                                                      algebraic field extensions.
The map              :   K[x]/(f) ->          given by d[g + (/)] = *# + (a-/) is an isomor-
phism by Corollary III.2.11. Therefore the composite
                                                                                                                                                         Theorem 1.11. If F is a finite dimensional extension field of K, then F is finitely
                                                    K(u)       C W(/) - LW/W i L(v)                                                                generated and algebraic over K.
                                                                                                                                -1
is   an isomorphism of fields such that g(u) |-> (ag)(v). In particular, i/^                                                         agrees with
oonK and maps w onto v (since cr( K = L by Exercise III. 1.15).            1   )    1                                                                    PROOF. \f[F:K} = n and u e F, then the set of n + 1 elements l*,w,w 2        un                                                                                                                                                                                        {                               ,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .       ,         }


                                                                                                                                                   must be linearly dependent. Hence there are a £ K, not all zero, such that a -f a u +                                                                                                               t                                                                                                                        x



                                                                                                                                                              h a n u = 0, which implies that u is algebraic over K. Since u was arbi-
                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                   a2 u 2 H
Corollary 1.9. Let E and F ^c/i £e extension fields ofK and let u £ E a/iJ v £ F be                                                                trary,       F is algebraic over K. If                                                                                j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 vu       .       .           .           ,           v n } is a basis of                             F over K, then it is easy to see
algebraic over K. Then u  J v are roots of the same irreducible polynomial f £ K[x] if                                                             that F = K(v u               v v ). m                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,



and only if there i* an isomorphism offields K(u)                                                  = K(v) which sends u onto v and            is

the identity on K.
                                                                                                                                                   Theorem 1.12. //F is an extension field ofK and X is a subset ofF such that
      PROOF. (=*) Apply Theorem 1.8 with a =                                             K (so that af = /for all /e
                                                                                                   l                                               F = K(X) and every element ofXis algebraic over K, then F is an algebraic extension
      (<=)       Suppose o-                   :   ^(w)        ^   /f(t;)   with a(u) = v and a(k) = k for all k e K. Let
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                   ofK. IfX is a finite set, then F is finite dimensional overK.

fe K[x] be the irreducible polvnomial of the algebraic element u. If / =
                                                                                                                                                         PROOF. If v £ F, then v £ K(u u                                                                                                              .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u n ) for some u { £ ^(Theorem 1.3) and there
                                                                                                                                                   is   a tower of subfields:
then       ^    = f(u) =
                                      i   =
                                                  fc"
                                                        1'-
                                                              Therefore,           = a(   £
                                                                                        \i =
                                                                                          :
                                                                                                   few')
                                                                                                       /
                                                                                                           = X) <K*.*0 = X) o-(^V(w )
                                                                                                                  i                  i
                                                                                                                                              l



                                                                                                                                                                                    K C K(u0 C K(u u u C                                                                 2)                   •       •           •       C K(u u                                                  « n _0   C #(«,,... u
                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                                                                ,       n ).

= Z kMuY = Z km =                                  1
                                                              /(c).                                                                                Since u x is algebraic over K, it is necessarily algebraic over K(u u                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .       .               wt _i) for each
      i                           i   =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,


                                                                                                                                                   /    > 2,                say          K(u u          « _i)(wi) = K(u u
                                                                                                                                                                                                 of degree                        w») we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rt          .           Since                                                                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,           t                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


                                                                                                                                                   [K(u u     Wi)
                                                                                                                                                                .  K(u u.     w _0] = n by Theorem 1 .6. Let n be the degree of Ui over
                                                                                                                                                                                .                        :                   .   .   .                   t
   Up to this point we have always dealt with a root of a polynomial / e K[x] in some                                                                                                   ,                                                    ,


                                                                                                                                                   K; then repeated application of Theorem 1.2 shows that [K(ui,                        u n ) K]
given extension field F of K. The next theorem shows that it really is not necessary to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   .   .                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                                                                                                   = nr2 r„. By Theorem 1.1 1 K(u u
                                                                                                                                                                -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                               u n ) (and hence v) is algebraic over K. Since                                                                         .

have F given in advance.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


                                                                                                                                                   u £ F was arbitrary, F is algebraic over K. If * = {wi,             u n is finite, the same                                                                                                                                          .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,   ]



                                                                                                                                                   proof (with F = K(u u       u n )) shows that [F K] = nr 2        -r„ is finite.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                                                                                         :                            -   •


Theorem 1.10. //K                                 is a field and f £ K[x] polynomial of degree n, then there exists a

simple extension field F = K(u) ofK such that:

          (i)    u £ F is a root off;                                                                                                              Theorem 1.13. // F «• aai algebraic extension field of E ««^/E /j                                                                                                                                                                                                                    algebraic exten-
       (ii)       K] < n, with equality holding if and only iff is irreducible in K[x];
                 [K(u)       :
                                                                                                                                                   sion field ofK, then F is an algebraic extension ofK.

    (iii) iffis irreducible in K[x], then K(u) is unique up to an isomorphism which is the

identity on K.                                                                                                                                           PROOF. Let ueF; since u is algebraic over E, bn u n                                                                                                                                                                                    -\              \-          b u     x               +b =                                    for
                                                                                                                                                   some bi zE(bn ^ 0). Therefore, u is algebraic over the subfield K(b                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b n ). Con-
      REMARK. In view of (iii)                                     it is   customary to speak of the field F obtained by ad-                       sequently, there is a tower of fields

joining a root of the irreducible polynomial / £ K[x] to the field K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K d K(b                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ...,b n )d K(b                                                                       ,            b n )(u),

      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.10. We may assume that /is irreducible (if not,                                                                         with [K(b                            ,    .   .   .       ,   b n )(u):K(b                                ,       .       .   .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b n )] finite by Theorem 1.6 (since u is algebraic over
replace / by one of its irreducible factors). Then the ideal (/) is maximal in K[x]                                                                #(6o,    •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                            b n )) and [XX6                              ,       .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bn )         :       K] finite by Theorem 1.12 (since each bi e E is
(Theorem III.3.4 and Corollary III.6.4) and the quotient ring F = K[x]/(f) is a                                                                    algebraic over #). Therefore,                                                                                                                                  .           -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b n )(u)                :       K] is finite (Theorem 1.2). Hence
238                                   CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                       APPENDIX: RULER AND COMPASS CONSTRUCTIONS                                                       239



u s K(b      ,
                 .   .   .   ,
                                 bn )(u) is algebraic over K (Theorem 1.11). Since u was arbitrary, F is               (i)       Li        D L is a point in the plane ofF;
                                                                                                                                               2


algebraic over K.                                                                                                     (ii)       Li fl Ci      =      or consists of one or two points in the plane c?/F(^u) for some
                                                                                                               U£F(u > 0);
                                                                                                                   (iii) Ci fl C 2 =                            or consists of one or two points in the plane ofF(^) for some
                                                                                                               u £ F (u > 0).
Theorem 1.14. Let F be an extension field ofK and E the set of all elements ofF
which are algebraic over K. Then E is a subfield ofF (which is, of course, algebraic
                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Exercise, (iii) If the circles are G x + y + aix +                                       :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2   2
over K).
                                                                                                               b\y + ci = and C x + y + a x + b y + c = 2   :
                                                                                                                                                                2        2
                                                                                                                                                                           £ F by the remarks pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                    2            2       2     (tf t

                                                                                                               ceding the lemma), show that G fl C is the same as the intersection of G or C 2
      Clearly the subfield E is the unique maximal algebraic extension of                    K contained       with the straight line L (ai — a )x + (bi — b )y + (d — c ) = 0. Verify that L is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                                                :              2                     2                 2
in F.
                                                                                                               line in F; then case (iii) reduces to case (ii).
                                                                                                                       Suppose L has the equation dx + ey + f =
                                                                                                                     (ii)                           x                    (d,e,f e F). The case d =     is
   PROOF OF 1.14. If u,v zE, then K(u,v) is an algebraic extension field of K by                                                     d ^ 0, we can assume d = 1 (why?), so that x = ( — ey — /). If
                                                                                                               left as an exercise; if
Theorem 1.12. Therefore, since u — v and uv~ (v ^ 0) are in K(u,v), u — v and
                                                                      l

                                                                                                                                                                                       = ( — ey — f) 2 +
wir s E. This implies that E is a field (see Theorem 1.2.5).
      1
                                                                                                               (x,y) eLi fl G, then substitution gives the equation of          as                                     G
                                                                                                               y + a,(-ey - /) + hy + d = Ay _+ By + C = 0, with A,B,C e F. If A = 0,
                                                                                                                2                                     2


                                                                                                               then y £ F\ hence x £ F and x,y e F(-\Jl) = F. If A ^ 0, we may assume A = 1. Then
                                                                                                               y + By + C =
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                   and completing the square yields (y + B/2) 2 + (C - B2/4) = 0.
                                                                                                               This implies that either L D      =                       G
                                                                                                                                                        or x,y e F(^u) with u = - C + B 2/4 > 0.
                                                                                                                                                                    Y


APPENDIX: RULER AND COMPASS CONSTRUCTIONS
      The word "ruler" is to be considered as a synonym for straightedge (as is cus-                             A real number c will be said to be constructible if the point (c,0) can be con-
                                                                                                               structed (precisely located)                             by a       finite   sequence of ruler and compass constructions
tomary in geometric discussions). We shall use field extensions to settle two famous
problems of antiquity:
                                                                                                               that begin with points with integer coordinates.                                          The constructibility of c (or (c,0)) is
                                                                                                               clearly equivalent to the constructibility (via ruler and compass) of a line segment of
   (A) Is it possible to trisect an arbitrary angle by ruler and compass constructions?
   (B) Is it possible via ruler and compass constructions to duplicate an arbitrary                            length c    Furthermore the point (c,d) in the plane may be constructed via ruler
                                                                                                                             |     |
                                                                                                                                       .




cube (that is, to construct the side of a cube having twice the volume of the given                            and compass if and only if both c and d are constructible real numbers. The integers
cube)?                                                                                                         are obviously constructible, and it is not difficult to prove the following facts (see

      We shall assume as known all the standard ruler and compass constructions as                             Exercise 25):

presented in almost any plane geometry text. Example: given a straight line L and a                                   (i)        every rational number is constructible;
point P not on L, the unique straight line through P and parallel L [resp. perpen-                                   (ii)        if c      >       is   constructible, so is sjc,
dicular to L] is constructible. Here and below "constructible" means "constructive                                   (iii)       if c,d are constructible, then c                           ± d, cd, and c/d (d y± 0) are constructible, so
by ruler and compass constructions."                                                                           that the constructible numbers form a subfield of the real numbers that contains
    Furthermore we shall adopt the viewpoint of analytic geometry as follows.                                  the rationals.
Clearly we may construct with ruler and compass two perpendicular straight lines
(axes). Choose a unit length. Then we can construct all points of the plane with
integer coordinates (that is, locate them precisely as the intersection of suitable con-
                                                                                                               Proposition 1.16. // a real number c is constructible, then c is algebraic of degree a
structible straight lines parallel to the axes). As will be seen presently, the solution to
                                                                                                               power of 2 over the field Q of rationals.
the stated problems will result from a knowledge of what other points in the plane
can be constructed via ruler and compass constructions.
                                                                                                                     PROOF. The preceding remarks show that we may as well take the plane of Q as
      If   F is a subfield of the field R of real numbers, the plane of F is the subset of the
                                                                                                               given.        To say that c is constructible then means that (c,0) may be located (con-
plane consisting of all points (c,d) with c e F, d £ F. If P,Q are distinct points in the
                                                                                                               structed) by a finite sequence of allowable ruler and compass constructions be-
plane of F, the unique line through P and Q is called a line in F and the circle with
                                                                                                               ginning with the plane of Q. In the course of these constructions various points of the
center P and radius the line segment                    PQ is called a circle in F. It is readily verified     plane will be determined as the intersections of lines and/or circles used in the con-
                                                         + by + c =
that every straight line in F has an equation of the form ax                                   (a,b,c e F)
                                                                                                               struction process. For this is the only way to arrive at new points using only a ruler
and every circle in F an equation of the form x + y + ax + by + c =
                                                                  2       2
                                                                                               (a,b,c £ F)
                                                                                                               and compass. The first step in the process is the construction of a line or circle,
(Exercise 24).
                                                                                                               either of which is completely determined by two points (center                                                 P and radius PT for
                                                                                                                                                                            Q or else they may be
                                                                                                               the circle). Either these points are given as being in the plane of
                                                                                                               chosen arbitrarily, in which case they may be taken to be in the plane of Q also.
Lemma 1.15. Let F be a subfield of the field R of real numbers and let Li,L                           2   be   Similarly at each stage of the construction the two points that determine the line or
nonparallel lines in F and Ci,C2 distinct circles in F. Then                                                   circle used may be taken to be either points in the plane of                                                Q or points constructed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




240                                       CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                             APPENDIX: RULER AND COMPASS CONSTRUCTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                       241



in previous steps. In view of                     Lemma 1.15 the first new point so constructed lies in the                                                         3.    If u u     .       .   .   ,    u n e F then the field K(u u                                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u n ) is (isomorphic to) the quotient field
plane of an extension field Q(^u) of Q, with u e Q, or equivalently in the plane of an                                                                                    of the ring K[u u                                .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u n ].
extension Q(v) with v 2 e Q. Such an extension has degree 1                                                                      = 2° or 2 over Q (de-
                                                                                                                                                                    4. (a)       For any u u                                .       .           .       ,       u n e F and any permutation a e 5 n                                                                                                      K(u u       .   .       .       un )
pending on whether or not v e Q). Similarly the next new point constructed lies in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                   ,




plane of Q(v,w) = Q(v)(w) with w 2 e Q(v). It follows that a finite sequence of ruler
                                                                                                                                                                          (b)    K(U U               .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   Iln-OOO = K(U U                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   Un).
and compass constructions gives rise to a finite tower of fields:
                                                                                                                                                                          (c)    State and prove the analogues of (a) and (b) for K[u u                                                                                                                                              .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,   un ].

                                      Q C Q(v0 C Q(v u v C              2)
                                                                                        •
                                                                                              C Q(v u                .   .   .     on )                                   (d) If each w t is algebraic over K, then K(u u                                                                                                                 .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              u n ) = K[u u ...,«„].
                                                                                                                                 ,




with Vi 2 s Q(i?i,                        Vi-0 and [Q(v u         = 1 or 2 (2 <
                                                                             vt )           Q(v u                                                  < n).            5.    Let L and                       M be subfields of F and LM                                                                                        their composite.
                                                                                                                                                                                    K d L fl M and M = K(S) for some S d M, then LM = L(S).
                          .   .   .
                                      ,                     .   .   .
                                                                        ,           :               .   .   .   ,                              /
                                                                                                                                                                             (a) If
The point (eft) constructed by this process then lies in the plane of F = Q(v u                                                                            v n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                           true that LM is the set theoretic union L U M?
                                                                                                                                                   •   ,

                                                                                                                                                                             (b) When is                              it
By Theorem 1.2, [F Q] is a power of two. Therefore, c is algebraic over Q (Theo-
                                          :

                                                                                                                                                                             (c) If Eu ... £n are subfields of F, show that
rem 1 .1 1). Now Q <Z Q(c) C F implies that [Q(c) Q] divides [F Q] (Theorem 1 .2),              :                                         :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,




whence the degree [Q(c) Q] of c over Q is a power of 2.
                                              :                                                                                                                                                                            EtEz- .-En                                       = E^E^X-                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .(En^En)))-                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •)-


                                                                                                                                                                    6.    Every element of K(x u                                                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    x n ) which is not in K is transcendental over K.

                                                                                                                                                                     7.   If y is algebraic over K(u) for some u a                                                                                                  F and            i?       is transcendental over K, then u is
Corollary 1.17. An angle of 60° cannot be trisected by ruler and compass con-                                                                                             algebraic over #(i>).
structions.
                                                                                                                                                                     8.   If u s      F is algebraic of odd degree over K, then so is u and K(u) = K(u ).                                                                                                                  2                                                 2



      PROOF. If it were possible to trisect a 60° angle, we would then be able to                                                                                    9. If x
                                                                                                                                                                             n       — as               and u £ F is a root of x n — a and m divides n, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is irreducible
construct a right triangle with one acute angle of 20°. It would then be possible to                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                                          prove that the degree of u over K is h/w. What is the irreducible polynomial for
construct the real number (ratio) cos 20° (Exercise 25). However for any angle a,
                                                                                                                                                                          u m over K?
elementary trigonometry shows that
                                                                                                                                                                    10. If      F is algebraic over K and D is an integral domain such that K CZ D CZ F, then
                                                  cos 3a = 4 cos 3 a — 3 cos a.
                                                                                                                                                                          D is a field.
Thus if a = 20°, then cos 3a = cos 60° = \ and cos 20° is a root of the equation                                                                                              Give an example of a field extension K CZ F such that
                                                                                                                                                                    11. (a)                                                                £ F are transcen-
i = 4^3 _       and hence of the polynomial Sx 3 — 6x — 1. But this polynomial is
                                                                                                                                                                          dental over K, but K(u,v)     K(x u x 2 ). [Hint: consider v over the field K(u).]
irreducible in Q[x] (see Theorem III. 6.6 and Proposition III. 6. 8). Therefore cos 20°
                                                                                                                                                                          (b) State and prove a generalization of Theorem 1.5 to the case of n transcen-
has degree 3 over Q and cannot be constructible by Proposition 1.16.
                                                                                                                                                                          dental elements u u                                           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                uv      .




                                                                                                                                                                    12. If d         >               is   an integer that is not a square describe the field Q(yjd) and find a set
                                                                                                                                                                          of elements that generate the whole field.
Corollary 1.18.   // is impossible by ruler and compass constructions to duplicate a cube

of side length 1 (that is, to construct the side of a cube of volume 2).                                                                                            13. (a)   Consider the extension Q(«) of Q generated by a real root u of x 3 — 6x 2 +
                                                                                                                                                                          9x + 3. (Why is this irreducible?) Express each of the following elements in
                                                                                                                                                                                                       w 4 ;w 5 ;3w 5 - u 4 + 2; (w + l)" 1 (" 2 - 6w + 8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _1
     PROOF. If s is the side length of a cube of volume 2, then s is a root of x 3 — 2,                                                                                   terms of the basis 1,h,m 2                                        {                           }       :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




which is irreducible in Q[x] by Eisenstein's Criterion (Theorem III. 6. 15). Therefore                                                                                    (b)    Do the same with respect to the basis                                                                                                          {   l,w,w 2 ,w 3 ,w 4                  )       of Q(u) where u is a real
s is not constructible by Proposition 1.16.                                                                                                                               root of x b                     + 2x + 2 and the elements in question are: (w + 2)(u + 3w);w _1                                                                                                                2                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;


                                                                                                                                                                          w 4 (w 4   +           3u 2     + 7w + 5);(« + 2)(« + 3)"                                                             2                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




                                                                                                                                                                    14. (a) If     F = Q(V2, V3), find [F Q] and a basis of F over Q.                                                   :




                                                        EXERCISES                                                                                                         (b)    Do the same for F = Q(/,\/3,co), where £ C, = —1, and co is a com-                                                                                           /                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                                                                          plex (nonreal) cube root of 1
      Note: Unless specified otherwise F is always an extension field of the field K and
Q,R,C denote the fields of rational, real, and complex numbers respectively.                                                                                        15.   In the field K(x), let u = x 3 /(x                                                                            +               1).     Show that K(x) is a simple extension of the
                                                                                                                                                                          field K(u).                     What is [K(x)                                             :   K(u)]l
 1.   (a)   [F   :   K] = 1 if and only if F = K.
      (b) If [F       :K] is prime, then there are no intermediate fields between F and K.                                                                          16.   In the field C, Q(z") and Q(V^) are isomorphic as vector spaces, but not as fields.
      (c)   If u s    F has degree n over K, then n divides [F                                                      K].
                                                                                                                                                                          Find an irreducible polynomial /of degree 2 over the field Z2 Adjoin a root u of
                                                                                                                :

                                                                                                                                                                    17.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




 2.   Give an example of a finitely generated field extension, which is not finite di-                                                                                    / toZ to obtain a field Z2 (w) of order 4. Use the same method to construct a field
                                                                                                                                                                                         2

      mensional. [Hint: think transcendental.]                                                                                                                            of order 8.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .




242                                        CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                     2.    THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                        243


18.   A complex number is said to be an algebraic number if                                                                                 it is algebraic   over   Q and   26. Let Ei       and E2 be subfields of F and X a subset of F. If every element of Ex is
      an algebraic integer if it is the root of a monic polynomial in Z[x].                                                                                                            algebraic over   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2,      then every element of E (X) is algebraic over E2 (X). [Hint:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X


        (a) If u is an algebraic number, there exists an integer n such that nu is an                                                                                                  Ex(X) CZ (EJXMEi); use Theorem 1.12.]
      algebraic integer.
            (b) If r s         Q is an algebraic integer, then r e Z.
            (c)       If u    is      an algebraic integer and n s Z, then u + n and nu are algebraic
      integers.                                                                                                                                                              2.       THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM
            (d)       The sum and product of two algebraic integers are algebraic integers.
                                                                                                                                                                                The Galois group of an arbitrary field extension is defined and the concept of a
19. If          u,v    s    F are algebraic over K of degrees m and n respectively, then                                                                                     Galois extension is defined in terms of the Galois group. The remainder of the section
      [K(u,v)          :   K] < mn. If (m,n) = 1, then [K(u,v) K] = mn.                                      :
                                                                                                                                                                             is devoted to proving the Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory (Theorem 2.5),

                                                                                                                                                                             which enables us to translate problems involving fields, polynomials, and extensions
20. Let L and                M be intermediate                      fields in the extension                                         K CZ F.                                  into group theoretical terms. An appendix at the end of the section deals with sym-
            (a)       K] is finite if and only if [L
                      [LAf    :                      and [M     are finite.                          :                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                             metric rational functions and provides examples of extensions having any given finite
            (b) If [LM K] is finite, then [L K] and [M K] divide [LM
                                       :                                    and:                                         :                             :
                                                                                                                                                                             group as Galois group.
                                                      [LM :K]<[L: K][M                                           :       K],                                                    Let F be a field. The set Aut F of all (field) automorphisms F —> F forms a group
                                                                                                                                                                             under the operation of composition of functions (Exercise 1). In general, it is not
            (c)       If [L       :   K] and [M          :     are finite and relatively prime, then                                                                         abelian. It      was Galois' remarkable discovery that many questions about fields
                                                                                                                                                                             (especially about the roots of polynomials over a field) are in fact equivalent to cer-
                                                         [LM    :       K] = [L              :       K][M            :       K].
                                                                                                                                                                             tain group-theoretical questions in the automorphism group of the field. When these
            (d) If L and   M are algebraic over then so LM.                            A',                                   is                                              questions arise, they usually involve not only F, but also a (suitably chosen) subfield
                                                                                                                                                                             of F; in other words we deal with field extensions.
21. (a)         Let L and M be intermediate     of the extension K CZ F, of  fields                                                                        finite dimen-
                                                                                                                                                                                  If   F is an extension field of K, we have seen in Section               that the ^-module (vector
      sion over K. Assume that [LM    K] = [L #][M K] and prove thatL
                                                                    :                            :                       :                                    flM=K          space) structure of F is of much significance. Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it   seems natural to con-
      (b) The converse of (a) holds if [L K] or [M K] is 2.                        :                             :

                                                                                                                                                                             sider those automorphisms of                 F that are also A'-module maps. Clearly the set of all
      (c) Using a real and a nonreal cube root of 2 give an example where L D                                                                                    M = K,      such automorphisms is a subgroup of Aut F.
      [L K] = [M AT] = 3, but [LM AT] < 9.
                                                                                                                                                                                 More generally let E and F be extension fields of a field K. If a E —> F is a non-
            :                         :                                  :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :




22.   F is an algebraic extension of K if and only if for every intermediate field E every                                                                                   zero homomorphism of fields, then a(l E ) = If by Exercise III. 1.1 5. If a is also a

      monomorphism a                          :   E —> E which is the identity on K is in fact an automorphism                                                               /C-module homomorphism, then for every k z K
      of E.                                                                                                                                                                                                     <j(k)   = (r(k\ E ) = ka(l E ) = k\ F = k.
23. If u £        F is algebraic over K(X) for some X CZ F then there exists a finite subset                                                                                 Conversely, if a homomorphism of fields a                    :   E — F fixes K elementwise (that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *

      A''   CZ A' such that u is algebraic over K(X').                                                                                                                       a(k) = k for all k z AT), then a is nonzero and for any u £ F,

24. Let         F be a subfield of R and F,Q points in the Euclidean plane whose coordinates                                                                                                                            a(ku) = a(k)a(u) = ka(u)
      lie    in F.
                                                                                                                                                                             whence a is a A'-module homomorphism.
            (a)       The     straight            line       through           P and Q has an equation of the form
      ax + 6y + c = 0, with                                     £ F.

            (b)       The circle with center P and radius the line segment PQ has an equation
                                                                                                                                                                             Definition 2.1. Let E and F be extension fields ofafieldK. A nonzero map a                            E —> F
      of the form x 2                      + y + ax + by + c =
                                              2
                                                                                                         with a,b,c e F.
                                                                                                                                                                             which is both a field and a K-module homomorphism is called a K -homomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :




25. Let c,dbe constructible real numbers.                                                                                                                                    Similarly if a field automorphism a £ Aut F is a K-homomorphism, then a is called a
            (a) c          + d and c — d are constructible.                                                                                                                  K-automorphism ofF. The group of all ^-automorphisms ofF is called the Galois
            (b) If ^         ^ 0, then                   is constructible.                           [Hint: If O,0) is the intersection of the                               group ofF over        K and is denoted Aut^F.
      x axis and the straight line through (0,1) that is parallel the line through (Q,d)
      and (c,0), then x = c/d.]                                                                                                                                                 REMARKS, tf-monomorphisms and ^-isomorphisms are defined in the obvious
        (c) cd is constructible [Hint: use (b)J.                                                                                                                             way. Here and below the identity element of Aut A F and its identity subgroup will
        (d) The constructible real numbers form a subfield containing Q.                                                                                                     both be denoted by 1
            (e)       If c   > 0, then aJc is constructible. [Hint: If                                                        >>   is       the length of the straight
      line segment perpendicular to the x axis that joins (1,0) with the (upper half of                                                                                               EXAMPLE. Let F = K(x), with K any field. For each a e K with a 9* the map
      the) circle with center ((c                            + l)/2,0) and radius (c + l)/2 then y = -\Jc]                                                                   da   :   F— F given by f(x)/g(x) |-> f{ax)/g{ax) is a /^-automorphism of F; (this may
                                                                                                                                                                                          *
244                        CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                               2.    THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                          245



be verified directly or via Corollaries III.2.21(iv), III.4.6, and III. 5.6, and Theorem                                       Theorem 2.3. Let F be an extension field ofK, E an intermediate field and U a sub-
               K is infinite, then there are infinitely many distinct automorphisms a a
III.4.4(ii)). If                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                              group of Autv¥. Then
whence Aut K F is infinite. Similarly for each b s K, the map r b F -> F given by
                                                                                :

                                                                                                                                              H' =                               = v for all a eH] is an intermediate field of the extension;
                                                                                                                                        (i)            {   v £ F         o-(v)
f(x)/g(x)\-> f(x       + b)/g(x + b)        is   a AT-automorphism of F. If a   ^ 1* and b ^ 0,                                        (ii)   E'   =
                                                                                                                                                                     |




                                                                                                                                                           a s Aut K ¥           a(u) = u for all u £ E} = Aut E F is a subgroup ofAut K F.
                                                                                                                                                       {                     \




then (7 a T6 ^ T6(7 a whence AuU-F is nonabelian. Also see Exercise 6.
                      ,




                                                                                                                                       PROOF. Exercise.
Theorem 2.2. Let F be an extension field of K andf s K[x]. //u e F is aroot of i and
a s /fw/ K F, //ze/z a(u) e F /j a/jo a root off.                                                                                 The field H' is called the fixed field of                           H
                                                                                                                                                                            in F (although this is a standard term
                                                                                                                              there is no universal notation for it, but the "prime notation" will prove useful).
                                    n
                                                                                                                              Likewise, whenever it is convenient, we shall continue to denote the group Aut^F in
      PROOF. If           f=J2 kx\ then f(u) =                implies   = a(f(u)) = a(J2^)
                                                                                                                              this context as E'                   If we denote Aut A-F by G, it is easy to see that on the one hand,
                             = i        i
                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                                    F' = Aut F F =         1   and        K' = Aut*F = G;
                           X


                                                                                                                              and on the other, V = F (that is, F is the fixed field of the identity subgroup). It is
      One of the principal applications of Theorem 2.2 is in the situation where u is
                     K with irreducible polynomial fe K[x\ of degree n. Then any
                                                                                                                              not necessarily true, however, that G' =                              K (as can be seen in the first examples after
algebraic over
                                                                                                                              Theorem 2.2, where G = 1 and hence G' = F ^ K; also see Exercise 2).
a £ AutA-#0) is completely determined by its action on u (since U,","       {
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            ,   .   •   .   ,
                                                                                                                " n "M
is a basis of K(u) over # by Theorem 1.6). Since a(u) is a root of /by Theorem 2.2,

\Aut K K(u)\ < m, where m is the number of distinct roots of /in K(u); (m < n by
Theorem III. 6.7).                                                                                                            Definition 2.4. Let F be an extension field ofK such that the fixed field of the Galois
                                                                                                                              group Aut K F is              K itself Then F             is said to   be a Galois extension (field) of    K or to be
      EXAMPLES. Obviously if F = K, then Aut A F consists of the identity element                                             Galois over K. 1

alone. The converse, however, is false. For instance, if u is a real cube root of 2 (so
that   QC Q(w)       C
                   R), then Aut Q(w) is the identity group. For the only possible                                                REMARKS. F is Galois over K if and only if for any u e F — K, there exists a
                                                                                                                              AT-automorphism a e Aut^Fsuch that a(u) ^ u. If Fis an arbitrary extension field of
images of u are the roots of x z — 2 and the other two roots are complex. Similarly,
                                                                                                                              K and K is the fixed field of Aut A-F (possibly K ^ K), then                             it is   easy to see that F is
AutqR is the identity (Exercise 2).
                                                                                                                              Galois over K    that K C K  ,   and that Aut K F = Aut^F.
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,




    EXAMPLES. C = R(/) and ± are the roots of x + 1. Thus Aut R C has order
                                                 /
                                                                  2


at most 2. It is easy to verify that complex conjugation {a + bi \-> a — bi) is a non-                                              EXAMPLES. C is Galois over R and Q( V3) is Galois over Q (Exercise 5). If K
identity R-automorphism of C, so that |Aut R C| = 2 and hence Aut R C ^Z Simi-                          2.                    is   an infinite field, then K(x) is Galois over K (Exercise 9).
larly Aut       Q(V3)^Z        2.


                                                                                                                                 Although a proof is still some distance away, it is now possible to state the
      EXAMPLES. If F = Q(^2^3) = Q(^2)(^3\ then since x - 3 is irreducible  2
                                                                                                                              Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory, so that the reader will be able to see just
over Q(V2) the proof of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 1.6 show that 1,V2,V 3 >V 6 is      {                             1
                                                                                                                              where the subsequent discussion is headed. If                               LM
                                                                                                                                                                              are intermediate fields of an ex-
a basis of F over Q. Thus if a £ Aut F, then a is completely determined by a(^2) and                                          tension with L               C
                                                                                                                                               M, the dimension [M L] is called the relative dimension of L and
                                                                                                                                                                                                :



a(^3). By Theorem 2.2 a(^2) =                ± ^2 and a(^3) = ± yj3 and this means that there                                 M. Similarly, if HJ are subgroups of the Galois group with H < 7, the index [J H]                                :


are at most four distinct Q-automorphisms of F. It is readily verified that each of the                                       is   called the relative index of                    H and J.
four possibilities is indeed a Q-automorphism of F and that AutQ^             Z2      2  =                   ©Z           .




      It is   shown in the appendix (Proposition 2.16) that for any given finite group G,
                                                                                                                              Theorem 2.5. (Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory) IfF is a finite dimensional
there is an extension with Galois group G. It is still an open question as to whether or
                                                                                                                              Galois extension ofK, then there is a one-to-one correspondence between the set of all
not every finite group is the Galois group of some extension over a specific field
(such as Q).                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                       A Galois extension is frequently required to be finite dimensional or at least algebraic
      The basic idea of what is usually called Galois Theory is to set up some sort of                                        and is defined in terms of normality and separability, which will be discussed in Section 3.
correspondence between the intermediate fields of a field extension K      F and the    C                                     In the finite dimensional case our definition is equivalent to the usual o.ie.                       Our definition is
subgroups of the Galois group Aut A F. Although the case where F is finite dimen-                                             essentially due to Artin, except that he calls such an extension"normal." Since this use of
sional over K is of the most interest, we shall keep the discussion as general as                                             "normal" conflicts (in case char F ^ 0) with the definition of "normal" used by many
possible for as long as we can. The first step in establishing this correspondence is                                         other authors, we have chosen to follow Artin" s basic approach, but to retain the (more or
given by                                                                                                                      less) conventional terminology.
                                                                                                                                                        .                         —
246                                CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                          2.      THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                                                        247


intermediate fields of the extension and the set of all subgroups of the Galois group                          REMARKS. It is quite possible for L" to contain L properly (similarly for H"
AutjzF (given              ^EhE' = AutvF) such that:                                                       and H). Fis Galois over K (by definition) if G' = K. Thus since K' = G in any case,
                                                                                                           F is Galois over K if and only if K = K". Similarly F is Galois over an intermediate
                    the relative dimension of two intermediate fields is equal to the relative index of
                                                                                                           field E if and only if E = E"
          (i)

the corresponding subgroups; in particular, Aut^F has order [F : KJ;
       F is Galois over every intermediate field E, but E is Galois over K ifand only if
      (ii)
                                                                                                              Let X be an intermediate field or subgroup of the Galois group. A" will be called
the corresponding subgroup E'  = Aut^F is normal in G = Aut K F; in this case G/E' is
                           group  Aut^F ofE over K.
                                                                                                          closed provided             X = X" Note that F is Galois over K if and only if K is closed.
                                                                                                                                               .


(isomorphic to) the Galois


      The proof of the theorem (which begins on p. 251) requires some rather lengthy
                                                                              leave the    We             Theorem 2.7. IfF is an extension field of K, then there is a one-to-one correspondence
preliminaries. The rest of this section is devoted to developing these.
                                                                             Galois                       between the closed intermediate fields of the extension and the closed subgroups of the
problem of constructing  Galois  extension  fields and the case of algebraic        ex-
                                                                                                           Galois group, given by E |— E' = Aut^F.
tensions of arbitrary dimension for the next section. The reader should note that
many of the propositions to be proved now apply to the general case.
      As indicated in the statement of the Fundamental Theorem, the so-called Galois                          PROOF. Exercise; the inverse of the correspondence is given by assigning to
                given by assigning to each intermediate field E the Galois group
correspondence is
                                                                                                          each closed subgroupH its fixed field H'. Note that by Lemma 2.6(iv) all primed
                                                                                                          objects are closed.
Aut^Fof Fover E. It will turn out that the inverse of this one-to-one correspondence
is   given by assigning to each subgroup              H   of the Galois group its fixed field in F. It
will be very convenient to use the "prime notation" of Theorem 2.3, so that E' de-
                                                                                                              This theorem is not very helpful until we have some more specific information as

notes Aut^F and H' denotes the fixed field of                   H in F.                                   to which intermediate fields and which subgroups are closed. Eventually we shall

      It    may be helpful to visualize these priming operations schematically as follows.                show that in an algebraic Galois extension all intermediate fields are closed and that
Let L and M be intermediate fields of the extension K C F and let J,H be subgroups                        in the finite dimensional case all subgroups of the Galois group are closed as well.

of the Galois group G = Aut K F.                                                                          We begin with some technical lemmas that give us estimates of various relative di-
                                                                                                          mensions.

      F         |           !                                                                    1    1



      U                       A                                                     U                A
                                                                                                           Lemma 2.8. Let F be an extension field ofK and L,M intermediate fields with
      M         |             M'                                                    H'^t         1
                                                                                                      H   L C M. // [M        L] is finite, then [V M'] < [M L]. In particular, if [F K] is
                                                                                                                                  :                                  :                                   :                                        :




      U                       A                                                     U                A    finite, then \Aut K F\ < [F    K].       :




     l          |                                                                                     J
                                                                                                              PROOF. We proceed by induction on n = [M L], with the case n = being
                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                             :                                1

      U                       A                                                     U                A             > and the theorem is true for all < n, choose u s M with u\L. Since
                                                                                                          trivial. If n       1                                                          /


     K          |             G;                                                   K                 G.   [M L] is finite, u is algebraic over L (Theorem 1.11) with irreducible polynomial
                                                                                                              :




                                                                                                          fe L[x] of degree k > 1 By Theorems 1 .6 and 1 1 [L(u) :L] = k and [M L(u)] = n/k.
                                                                                                                                           .                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                    :



                                                                                                          Schematically we have:
Formally, the basic facts about the priming operations are given by

                                                                                                                                                                     Vm          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                         M'
Lemma 2.6. Let F be an extension field oj K with intermediate fields L and M. Let H                                                                         n/k          u                                       A
and J be subgroups ofG = Aut^F. Then:

           (i)   = 1 andK' = G;
                     F'
                                                                                                                                                                     ^L(u)\—                 —^                  L(u) f

          00 V = F;                                                                                                                                              k       U                                       A
          (ii) L c M=*M' < L';

      (ii') H < J => J' C H';                                                                                                                                            L   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L'.

      (iii) L C L" and H < H" (where L" = (L')' and H" = (H')');

      (iv)          L'    = L'" and H' = H"\                                                              There are now two cases. If k < n, then 1 < n/k < n and by induction [U L(u)'} < k                                          :



                                                                                                          and [L(u)'   M'] < n/k. Hence [V M'] = [L
                                                                                                                          :                                  L(w)'][L(«)'
                                                                                                                                                             :              M'\ < k(n/k) = n
                                                                                                                                                                                                 f
                                                                                                                                                                                                     :                    :




      SKETCH OF PROOF, (i)-(iii) follow directly from the appropriate definitions.                        = [M :L] and the theorem is proved. On the other hand if k = n, then [M L(u)] = 1                                               :




To prove the first part of (iv) observe that (iii) and (ii) imply V" < V and that (iii)                   and     M
                                                                                                                  = L(u). In order to complete the proof in this case, we shall construct an in-
applied with L' in place of             H implies V < L'" The other part
                                                            .                is   proved similarly.       jective map from the set of S of all left cosets of M' in                                               V to the set T of all distinct
248                                                                                        CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.       THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                                                                                                                                                                249


roots (in F) of the polynomial fzL[x], whence \S\                                                                                                                                                                                       < \T\. Since \T\ < n by Theorem                                                          To complete the proof we must find a eJ with the desired properties. Now exactly
III.6.7                         and                      \S\           = [U M'} by definition, this will show that [U
                                                                                                           :                                                                                                                                              M'] < \T\ < n                :                                     one of the r u say n, is in                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         by definition; therefore n(«<) = u { e H' for all /. Since the
 = [M                    :      L\.                  The final statement of the theorem then follows immediately since                                                                                                                                                                                                       ai form a solution of (1), the first equation of the system yields:
|Aut*F| = [Aui K F                                                                                                 = [K                                                 < [F
                                                                                                                            f
                                                                                       :           1]                                   :       F']                                :   K].
        Let tNT be a                           If a s M' = Aut M F, then since u e M,
                                                                                   left                        coset of                                 M' in V                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4- u 2 a 2 H                                         h u r a r = 0.
t<j(u) = t(u). Thus every element of the coset tM' has the same effect on u and maps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The linear independence of the « over /' and the fact that the ai are nonzero imply
u h> t(u). Since t e L' = Aut L F, and u is a root of fe L[x], t(u) is also a root of /by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that some a it say a 2 is not in  Therefore there exists a eJ such that <ra 2 ^ a 2
Theorem 2.2. This implies that the map 5 — T given by rAf'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .

                                                                      H«) is well defined.                                                                                                                 >

                                   _1                       _1                         _1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Next consider the system of equations
If r(«) = t (u) (r,r £ //), then r    r(«) = w and hence r     r fixes «. Therefore, r    r
                                                             _1
fixes L(u) — Af elementwise (see Theorem 1 .6(iv)) and r        r e Af Consequently by                                                                                                                                                                                            '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (TTiiUyjXi -f (TTi(u 2 )x 2                                               H                            h (TTi(un+l )x n+ i
Corollary 1.4.3 r Af = rAf' and the map 5 —+ T is injective.                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (TT 2 (Ui)Xi                 4" <TT 2 (U 2 )X 2 H                                                      1-   (7r 2 (w n+ i)x n+ i                              =

        Several important applications of Lemma 2.8 are treated in tne appendix.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (2)

now prove an analogue of Lemma 2.8 for subgroups of the Galois group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o-r n (wi)xi 4- <TT n (u 2 )x 2                                           H                            h o-r n (wn+ i)A' n+ i =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            It is     obvious, since a is an automorphism and x\ = a u                                                                                                     x r = a r * r+ =.   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                ,                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   =
Lemma 2.9. Let F be an extension field ofK and let H,J be subgroups of the Galois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x n+ =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i               is a solution of (1), that *i                                                   = aa u             .        .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x r = o-a r x r+ =      = xn+ =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                    is a

group Aut K ¥ with H < J. //[J H] is finite, then [H' J'] < [J HJ.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          solution of (2).             We claim that system (2), except for the order of the equations, is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =x
                                                                                                                                                    :                                                                                               :                     :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            identical with system (1) (so that *i                                                                = aa u             .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   x r = aa r x r+              ,                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            =       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n+i         =                is a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            solution of (1)). To see this the reader should first verify the following two facts.
        PROOF. Let [J H] = n and suppose that [//'                                                 :                                                                                                                                                        :   J'}   > n. Then there exist                                          (i)    For any a eJ, {<jt u <jt 2                              ,       .   .        .       ar n           <Z y is a complete set of coset representa-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,          }

u u u2      ,       -       -       -
                                            ,    «n+i £ H' that are linearly independent over /'. Let {ri,r 2 ,                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r„|   be a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tives of        H in J\
complete set of representatives of the left cosets of in / (that is, J= t U t2                                                                                                                                                              H                                                          x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H           H         (ii)       if f   and 6 are both elements in the same coset of                                                                                                        H in /, then (since u                                                              e H')
U   •           •                                    H
      U T n and t^Tj e if and only if / = 7) and consider the system of n homo-
        •                                                                                                           H                                                                                                                                                                                                       f(«0 = d(ui) for i =                      1,2, ...,/! 4- 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {



geneous linear equations in n + 1 unknowns with coefficients r (« ) in the field F:                                                                                                                                                                                               t    ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            It   follows from (i) that there is some reordering i u                                                                                                .       .   .   ,       /   n+ i of 1,2,                         .       .   .   ,       n 4- 1, so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that for each k =                     1 ,2,   .   .    .   ,   n 4- 1 <rr k and r                                           tJb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 are in the same coset of                                                               H in /. By                               (ii)

                                                              ti(ui)xi -f ti(u 2 )x 2                                                                       -f-         ri(« 3 )^3                         +           •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       + T\(u n+ \)x n+ =                     \                                             the ki\\ equation of (2) is identical with the 4th equation of (1).
                                                              t 2 (ui)xi -f t 2 (u 2 )x 2                                                                   + r (« )^3 H 2     3                                                       h T 2 (u n+ i)x n+ i                       =

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lemma 2.10. Let F be an extension field ofK, L and M intermediate fields with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L C M, and H,J subgroups of the Galois group Aut^F with H < J.
                                                              r n ("i)^i                                   + T (u )x 4- r n (« )^3 H
                                                                                                                        n       2                   2                          3                                                        h ^(l/n+O^n+l =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       //L is closed and [M L] finite, then M is closed and [V M'] = [M L];
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (i)                                                                :                                                                                                                                       :                                            :




Such a system always has a nontrivial solution (that is, one. different from the zero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ifH is closed and [J H] finite, then J is closed and [H' J'] = [J H];
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (ii)                                                   :                                                                                                                                   :                                       :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (iii) ifF is a finite dimensional Galois extension ofK, then all intermediate fields
solution xi    = x2 =      = x n +i = 0; see Exercise VII. 2.4(d)). Among all such non-•       •       •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and all subgroups of the Galois group are closed and Aut K F has order [F                                                                                                                                                                       K].
trivial solutions choose one, say x = a u          x n + = a n +i with a minimal number of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :

                                                                                                                                                            x                      .   .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,


nonzero a By reindexing if necessary we may assume that x = a u
                                                {.                                     x r = «r,                                                                                                                                                                          x                    •   •       ,



Xr-^i =      = x n+ = (^ ^ 0). Since every multiple of a solution is also a solution
                        •       •       •
                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Note that (ii) (with                     H = 1) implies that every finite subgroup of Aul/^Fis closed.
we may also assume ai = 1 F (if not multiply through by ar ).                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




     We shall show below that the hypothesis that wi,            w n +i £ H' are linearly inde-                                                                                                                                             .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


pendent over J' (that is, that [//' /'] > /?) implies that there exists a e J such that                                                                             :                                                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.10. (ii)                                                                                          Applying successively the                                                                                    facts                   that
xi = crtfi, x 2 = aa 2      x r — aa x r+ =        = jc n+ = is a solution of the system
                                                                               ,       .       .        .      ,                                        r,                \
                                                                                                                                                                                               •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i                                                                                   J C J" and H = H" and Lemmas 2.8 and 2.9 yields
(1) and <ra 2 ^ a 2 Since the difference of two solutions is also a solution, X\ = ai — aa\,
                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H] < [J"                          H] = [J"                                   H"} < [H'                                                      < [J                 H];
                       x r = a r — aa r x r+x =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [/
x 2 = a 2 — <ra 2                                   = x n+ = 0, is also a solution of (1).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J'}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :                                 :                                           :                                          :                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                           •           •           •
                                                          ,    .       .   .       ,                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                    ,



But since ai — aai = 1 F — 1/- =        and a 2 ^ aa z it follows that Xi = 0, x 2 = a 2 —                                      -                                                                                              ,                                                                                            this implies that /                   = /" and [//'                                  :       /']      = [/          :       H}. (i) is proved similarly.
aa 2,   .  Xr = a T — aa r x T ^i =
                .       .       ,
                                        =       = is a nontrivial solution of (1) (x 2 ^ 0)                    ,
                                                                                                                                                •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (iii)      If   E is an intermediate field then [E                                                                      :       K] is finite (since [F                                                 :       K] is). Since F is
with at most r — 1 nonzero entries. This contradicts the minimality of the solution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Galois over K, K is closed and (i) implies that E is closed and [K'                                                                                                                                                 E']             = [E                 K]. In
xi = ai,        x = a r x r+ =      .    x n+i = 0. Therefore [H' :J']<n as desired.
                                            .    .   ,        r                                ,
                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                                    •       •           =                                                                                                                                                                   particular,            if   E = F, then                             |Aut*F|                           = [Aut*F                                :   1]   = [K'                        :   F']             = [F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :       K]          is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     finite.
250                                      CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                       2.   THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM                                       251



Therefore, every subgroup J of A\A K F is finite. Since 1 is closed (ii) implies that J is                      rem III. 6. 7. If r £ AutA-F, then it follows from Theorem 2.2 that r simply permutes
closed.                                                                                                         the Ui. This implies that the coefficients of the monic polynomial g(x) = (x    — ui)
                                                                                                                (x — u 2 )   — u ) £ E[x] are fixed by every r £ AutA-E. Since E is Galois over K, we
                                                                                                                             •   •   -   (x   r


   The first part of the Fundamental Theorem 2.5 can easily be derived from Theo-                               must have ge K[x]. Now u = u is a root of g and hence / g (Theorem 1.6(H)).
                                                                                                                                                               x                                    |




rem 2.7 and Lemma 2.10. In order to prove part (ii) of Theorem 2.5 we must deter-                               Since g is monic and deg g < deg /, we must have f = g. Consequently, all the roots
mine which intermediate fields correspond to normal subgroups of the Galois group                               of / are distinct and lie in E. Now if a e Aul K F, then a(u) is a root of /by Theorem 2.2,
under the Galois correspondence. This will be done in the next lemma.                                           whence a(u) e E. Therefore, E is stable relative to F and K.
   If E is an intermediate field of the extension K d F, E is said to be stable (relative
toK and F) if every ^-automorphism a e Aut K F maps E into itself. If E is stable and                               Let E be an intermediate               field   of the extension        K CZ F. A AT-automorphism
                                                   -1
a' e Aut*:F is the inverse automorphism, then
     1
                                                      also maps E into itself. This im-
                                                                               o-                               r £ AutA-E is said to be extendible to F if there exists a e AutA-F such that a              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E = r.
plies that a             |
                             E
                  is in fact a ^-automorphism of      (that is, a              E
                                                                       e Aut^F) with inverse
                                                                                        |
                                                                                            E                   It is   easy to see that the extendible A'-automorphisms form a subgroup of Aut K E.
o"
   -1
      E. It will turn out that in the finite dimensional case
         1
                                                                                    E
                                                                  is stable if and only if is            E      Recall that if E is stable, E' = Aut^F is a normal subgroup of G = AutA-F (Lemma
Galois over K.                                                                                                  2.11). Consequently, the quotient group                      G/E' is defined.



Lemma 2.11. Let F be an extension field ofK.                                                                    Lemma 2.14. Let F be an extension field ofK. and E a stable intermediate field of the
                                                                                                                         Then the quotient group Aut&F/ Aut^F is isomorphic to the group of all
                                                                                                                extension.
       // E is a stable intermediate field of the extension, then E' = Aut^F is a normal
         (i)
                                                                                                                K-automorphisms ofE that are extendible to F.
subgroup of the Galois group Aut^F',
         (ii)   ifYL is a normal subgroup of AutKF, then the fixed field H' ofH is a stable
intermediate field of the extension.
                                                                                                                   SKETCH OF PROOF. Since E is stable, the assignment a t~> a E defines a               |




                                                                                                                group homomorphism AutA-F —> Aut^F whose image is clearly the subgroup of all
                                                                                                                ^-automorphisms of E that are extendible to F. Observe that the kernel is AuU-Fand
   PROOF, (i) If u e E and a s Aut K F, then a(u) s E by stability and hence
                                                                                                                apply the First Isomorphism Theorem 1.5.7.
t<t(u) = a(u) for any r eE' = Aut^F. Therefore, for any a e AutA-F, r eE' and u e E,
a~ T<j(u) = a~ a(u) = u. Consequently, g~~ tg e E' and hence E' is normal in Aut K F.
     l                           l                                     x



         (ii)a £ AutA-F and t e H, then <j~ 1 t<j e
                If                                                             H
                                                    by normality. Therefore, for any
                                                                                                                    PROOF OF THEOREM 2.5. (Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory) Theo-
                                                                                                                rem 2.7 shows that there is a one-to-one correspondence between closed intermediate
        (j~   T(j{u) = u, which implies that ra(u) = a(u) for all t e H. Thus a(u) e H'
            l
u £ H',
                                                                                                                fields of the extension and closed subgroups of the Galois group. But in this case all
for any u e H', which means that                        H   f
                                                                is   stable.
                                                                                                                intermediate fields and all subgroups are closed by Lemma 2.10(iii). Statement (i) of
                                                                                                                the theorem follows immediately from Lemma 2.10(i).
         In the next three lemmas we explore in some detail the relationships between
                                                                                                                    (ii)    F is Galois over E since E is closed (that is, E = E"). E is finite dimensional
stable intermediate fields and Galois extensions and the relationship of both to the
                                                                                                                over K (since F is) and hence algebraic over K by Theorem 1.11. Consequently, if E is
Galois group.
                                                                                                                Galois over K, then E is stable by Lemma 2.13. By Lemma 2.1 l(i) E' = AuUF is
                                                                                                                normal in AutA-F. Conversely if E' is normal in AutAF, then E" is a stable inter-
                                                                                                                mediate field (Lemma 2.11 (ii)). But E = E" since all intermediate fields are closed
Lemma 2.12. IfF is a Galois extension field ofK and E is a stable intermediate field                            and hence E is Galois over K by Lemma 2.12.
of the extension, then E is Galois over K.                                                                          Suppose E is an intermediate field that is Galois over K (so that E' is normal in
                                                                                                                AutA-F). Since E and E' are closed and G' = K (F is Galois over K), Lemma 2.10
         PROOF. If u £ E — K, then there exists a e Aut K F such that a(u) ^ u since F is                       implies that \G/E'\ = [G      E'\ = [E":   G'} = [E   K]. By Lemma 2.14 G/E' =
                                                                                                                                                                         :             :


Galois over K. But a      Ee Aut K E by stability. Therefore, E is Galois over K by the
                                            \
                                                                                                                Aut A F/Aut^F is isomorphic to a subgroup (of order [E K]) of Aut A F. But part :


Remarks after Definition 2.4.                                                                                   (i) of the theorem shows that    AutA-F = [E K] (since E is Galois over K). This
                                                                                                                                                           |         |            :



                                                                                                                implies that G/E'    Aut A F. ^
Lemma 2.13. IfF is an extension field of K and E is an intermediate field of the ex-                                The modern development of Galois Theory owes a great deal to Emil Artin. Al-
tension such that E is algebraic and Galois over K, then E is stable (relative to F andK).                      though our treatment is ultimately due to Artin (via I. Kaplansky) his approach
                                                                                                                differs from the one given here in terms of emphasis. Artin's viewpoint is that the
         REMARK. The hypothesis that E is algebraic is essential; see Exercise 13.                              basic object is a given field F together with a (finite) group G of automorphisms of F.
                                                                                                                One then constructs the subfield K of F as the fixed field of G (the proof that the sub-
         PROOF OF 2.13. If u eE, let / £ K[x] be the irreducible polynomial of u and let                        set of     F fixed elementwise by G is a field is a minor variation of the proof of Theo-
u = U\, u 2      ,   .   .   .   ,   u T be the distinct roots of / that lie in E. Then r < n = deg /by Theo-   rem 2.3).
252                                              CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           APPENDIX: SYMMETRIC RATIONAL FUNCTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         253


Theorem 2.15. (Artin) Let ¥ be a field, G a group of automorphisms ofF and K the                                                                                                                                                                                                                              define a AT-automorphism of the field K(x u                xn ) which will also be denoted a                                                                                                                          .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


                                                G is finite, then F is a finite dimen-
fixed field ofG in F. Then F is Galois over K. If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Exercise 16). The map Sn -> Aut K K(x u             x n ) given by o- 1-> a is clearly a mono-                                                                                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


sional Galois extension o/K with Galois group G.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              morphism of groups, whence S n may be considered to be a subgroup of the Galois
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              group Aut K K(x u        x n ). Clearly, the fixed field E of S n in K(x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .       x n ) consists
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,

   PROOF. In any case G is a subgroup of Aui K F. If u e F — K, then there must be                                                                                                                                                                                                                            precisely of the symmetric functions; that is, the set of all symmetric functions is a
a a e G such that cr(u) ^ u. Therefore, the fixed field of AuIrF is K, whence F is                                                                                                                                                                                                                            subfield of K(x u ...,x n ) containing K. Therefore, by Artin's Theorem 2.15
Galois over K. If G is finite, then Lemma 2.9 (with H = 1,7= G) shows that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    K(xi,      x n ) is a Galois extension of E with Galois group Sn and dimension |5„|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .    .      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


[f    : = [V G'] < [G 1] = \G\. Consequently, F is finite dimensional over K,
                                       :                                  :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   = nl
whence G = G" by Lemma 2.10(iii). Since G' = K (and hence G" = #') by hy-
pothesis, we have AvX K F = K! = G" = G.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Proposition 2.16.                                                               IfG is a finite group, then there exists a Galois field extension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              with Galois group isomorphic to G.

APPENDIX: SYMMETRIC RATIONAL FUNCTIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PROOF. Cayley's Theorem II.4.6 states that for n = \G\, G is isomorphic to a
          Let        ^ be a field, K[x u                     domain and K(x u             xn )  .       .       .
                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                             xn      ]       the polynomial                                                                                                                                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              subgroup of Sn (also denoted G). Let K be any field and E the subfield of symmetric
the field of rational functions (see the example preceding Theorem 1.5). Since                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rational functions in K(x u         x n ). The discussion preceding the theorem shows                                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,

K(x u       x n ) is by definition the quotient field of K[x\,
            .    .       .
                                 ,
                                                                           x n ], we have                                                                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              that K(x u     x n ) is a Galois extension of E with Galois group S„. The proof of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,

K[x u      x n C K(xi,
            •   •    •
                             ,
                              x n ) (under the usual identification of /with //1a). Let5" n
                                       ]                          .       .    .
                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fundamental Theorem 2.5 shows that K{x u ...,*„) is a Galois extension of the
be the symmetric group on n letters. A rational function <p e K(x            x n ) is said to                                                                                                                                                    x ,         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fixed field £\ of                                             G such that Aut^A^,                                                                                                         .       .       .               x n ) = G.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,

be symmetric in *i,       x n over K if for every o- e S n
                                                     .    .   .
                                                                      ,                                                                                                                             ,




                                                         <p(x U X 2 ,                       •       •       •       ,    X n ) = ^C*V(l),*<r(2),                                               •        •       •       ,       *,(»)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The remainder of this appendix (which will be used only in the appendix to Sec-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tion 9) is devoted to proving two classical theorems about symmetric functions.
Trivially every constant polynomial is a symmetric function. If n                                                                                           = 4, then the poly-                                                                                                                               Throughout this discussion n is a positive integer, A' an arbitrary field, E the subfield
nomials                      /i       = Xi -f X + X + X   2                         3                               4,           f = XiX + X1X3 -f
                                                                                                                                     2                 + X 2X + X X +
                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                              Z                       2    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of symmetric rational functions in K(x u        x n ) and f,    ,/n eE the elementary                                                                                                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .    .



fz   = X1X2X3 + xijf x -f- X1X3X4 -f-        2   4                                                                                   and f = X1X2X3X4 are all symmetric func-                                                                                                                                 symmetric functions in x u       x n over K. We have a tower of fields:                                                         .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,

tions.          More generally the elementary symmetric functions in x u                                                                                                                                                                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x n over K are
defined to be the polynomials:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K C K(f, ...,fn )(ZE(Z K(x u                                                                                                                                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In Theorem 2.18 we shall show that E = K(f,
                                                                          f = xi + x H                                               2                            1-       xn =            ^   t    =i                                                                                                              If ui,                          .       .   .   ,   u r e K(x u                               . x n ), then every element of K(u u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,       u T ) is of the form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   fn ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



                                                                          /2        =                               ^2                       XiXj\                                                                                                                                                            g(«i,         .       .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        u r )/h(u u               .       .           .       ,u ) with g, /z e A[xi,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r           x r by Theorem 1.3. Consequently,                                                     .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,               ]

                                                                                                1       <t<y <n                                                                                                                                                                                               an element of K(u u                                                     .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u r ) [resp.                                                              .       .       .               u r ]] is usually called a rational function
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [resp. polynomial] in u u                                                                                   .       .           .           ,       "r over                               Thus the statement £ = K(fi,                                                                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,fn ) may
                                                                                                1       <i <j <k <n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              be rephrased as: every rational symmetric function is in fact a rational function of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              elementary symmetric functions f,                                                                                                                                             .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       fn              over                     K.           In                   order                        to                  prove that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E = AT(/l5 ...,/,) we need
                                                                      fk                                                         ^       v                        XiiXi-r              •   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Xi k \
                                                                                                1       <ii <                    .   .   .   <u <n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lemma 2.17. L^r K £e                                                                                                                                                fi,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fn the                              elementary symmetric functions in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              xi,   .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x n over                    K andkan integer with < k < n — 1. //hi,                                                                            1                                                                                                      .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h k £ K[x l5                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             xn ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              are the elementary symmetric functions in x l5                                                                                                                                                                        .       .   .               x k then each h can be written as a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,

                                                                      fn            = XX                X           2 -      •       -X n    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              polynomial over                                               K in fi,f                                                                                         f„ and x k+1 ,x k+2 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                                  }



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2,              .           .       .       ,                                                                             .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        xn    .




The verification that the / are indeed symmetric follows from the fact that they are
simply the coefficients of y in the polynomial g(y) e K[x u                                                                                                                                                                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x n ][y], where                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. The theorem is true when k = n - 1 since in that case
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              h\ = f — x n and h = f — h^x n (2 < j < n). Complete the proof by induction on
                                            = (y - xi)(y - x )(y - x )                                                                                                - xn )                                                                                                                                                                                                      2

                                     g(y)                                                                               2                             z   •       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                           (y                                                                                                                                 k in reverse order: assume that the theorem is true when k = r + 1 and
                                            = y n - fiy n - + / r -2                        1
                                                                                                                         2                                        + (- D " /^ + ( - D n/,-     71           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r + 1 < n — 1. Let g u       gv+i be the elementary symmetric functions in                                          .               .               .           ,




                                                                                                                                                                           = 1,2,                                               n) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              xi,   . x r +i and hi,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .       .      h r the elementary symmetric functions in x u       x r Since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .
      If    o-       s S„, then the assignments Xi                                                                                               x   <T( i)(/                                      .        .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                                             ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,        .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hi = gi — Xr+i and /z, = # y - h^iXr+i (2 < j < r), it follows that the theorem is also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,




                 fix,,..., Xn )lg(x                                           Y ,       .   .       .       ,       X„)h/te(l)                                    5    •   •   •   5                                                             •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       **(„))                       true for k                                        = r.
254                                                                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIX: SYMMETRIC RATIONAL FUNCTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                     255


Theorem 2.18. //K is a field, E the subfield of all symmetric rational functions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (i)   Every polynomial in K[xi,                                                               .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x„] can be written uniquely as a linear combina-

in    K(xi,                           .       .       .
                                                          ,
                                                                  xn)                      and         f\,           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                         ,           f„            the                             elementary symmetric functions,                                                                                                                                           then       tionof the n! elements x^x^                                                                           2 -   •       •x n i n(0              <           i   k           < k for each k) with coefficients in
E = K(fi,                                 .       .   .   ,
                                                              fn ).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kft,...,^];
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (ii)      every symmetric polynomial in K[xi,                                                                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x n ] lies in K[fi,                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fn ].

      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since [K(x u                                                                                                                                            .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                           .       ,   *»)                     :   E] = n and K(fi,                             !                                                        .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .       ,   fn ) c E C
         .x n ), it suffices by Theorem 1 .2 to show that
             .       .
                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x n)     :   K(fi,              .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   /„)]       PROOF. Letgjfc(^)(A: = 1, ...,«) be as in the proof of Theorem 2.18. As noted
< «!. Let F = #(/i, ...,/„) and consider the tower of fields:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           there the coefficients of g k (y) are polynomials (over K) in fi,     fn and x k+u    ,x n                                                                                                               .    .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,                                                  .   .   .     .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Since gk is monic of degree k and g k (x k ) = 0, x k k can be expressed as a polynomial
F C F(jc„) C F(*„_i,*„) C                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                 C F(*                        2,               .       .       .   ,       *„)                     C F(x                                   1?       .       .   .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                * B ) = K(x u                                                    *„).   over K in fi,      fn x k + u ...,*„ and          < k — 1). If we proceed step by step
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (/'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        beginning with k =        and substitute this expression for x k k in a polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
Since Ffe^+i, ...,*„) = F(x A+ i,                                                                                                                .    .   .                *»)(**), it suffices by Theorems 1.2 and 1.6
                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h s K[x u     x n the result is a polynomial in /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ],,/„, x      x n in which the                                                                                       ls       .   .   .                     .       .       .


to show that x n is algebraic over F of degree < n and for each k < n,x k is algebraic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                                                                                                                              Y ,                               ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        highest exponent of any x k is k —                                                                                  1 .         In other words /z is a linear combination of the
of degree <k over F(x*+i,                                                                                                        x n ). To do this, let g n {y) e F[>>] be the polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -x n in (i k < k for each k) with coefficients in K[fi,
                                                                                                         .       .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n  elements xi {l x i2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,fn ]. Fur-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        thermore these coefficient polynomials are uniquely determined since
                     SnGO = (y ~ *i)G> -x2 )--(y - xn ) =                                                                                                                                                                                      - f y*-i +          t                                                                + (-1)%.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {xi 11   -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -x n in                        <   ik      <k                              for each k\
Since g n e F[y] has degree ai and x n is a root of g„, x n is algebraic of degree at most n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |




over F = K(fi,         fn ) by Theorem 1 .6. Now for each k (1 < k < n) define a monic
                                                              .   .    .
                                                                               ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is linearly independent over E = K(fi, ... ,fn ) by Lemma 2.19. This proves (i) and

polynomial:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             also implies that                                               if      a polynomial h e K[x u                                                  .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,       xn   ]       is      a linear combination of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        aV        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                aV       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (z"/c     < /<) with coefficients in K(fi,                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,/n ), then the coefficients are in fact
             gk(y)                                    = gn(y)/(y - x k+l )-                                                          •
                                                                                                                                             -{y              - x n = (y - xO(y - x )-         )                                                                                                                2                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -(y         -x           k ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        polynomials in                                                                                       In particular, if h is a symmetric polynomial (that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,fi].

Clearly each g k (y) has degree k, x k is a root of gk {y) and the coefficients of g k (y) are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h eE = K(f,                                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,/„)), then                      h =            hxM-                    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -x n ° necessarily lies in K[fi,                                                                                .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   /„]. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        proves (ii).
precisely the elementary symmetric functions in xi,             x k By Lemma 2.17 each                                                                                                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,               .




g k {y) lies in F(x    k+U  -Ob],  whence     x k is algebraic of  degree at most k over
                                                                                       .   •   •   ,



F(*jfc+i,       x n ).
                 .        .       .           ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXERCISES
      We shall now prove an analogue of Theorem 2.1 8 for symmetric polynomial func-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Note: Unless stated otherwise F is always an extension field of the field K and F is
tions,       namely: every symmetric polynomial in x u                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,       x n over K is in fact a poly-                                                                                an intermediate field of the extension.
nomial in the elementary symmetric functions fi,                                                                                                                                                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fn           over X. In other words,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F is a field and a F —> F a (ring) homomorphism, then a = or a is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (a) If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,fn }. First we need
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 .
every symmetric polynomial in K[x u                                                                                                                            .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   xv          ]       lies in                                         K[f,                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          monomorphism. If o- ^ 0, then o-(l 7.) = 1^.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) The set Aut F of all field automorphisms F —> F forms a group under the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          operation of composition of functions.
Lemma 2.19. Le/ Kbea field and E the subfield ofall symmetric rational functions in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (c)    AutArF, the set of all ^-automorphisms of F is a subgroup of Aut F.
K(x b  ,x.  Then the set X = {xi x
             .       .                  -x>     < k < k for each kj is a basis of
                                                  n ).
                                                                                                                                                     [l
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                  i2
                                                                                                                                                                               -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i


K(xi,    .   .           .
                                  ,
                                              x„) oi;^/' E.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.               AutQR is the identity group. [Hint: Since every positive element of R is a square,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          it   follows that an automorphism of R sends positives to positives and hence that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          it   preserves the order in R. Trap a given real number between suitable rational
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since [K(x u                                                                                                                                                    .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   xn )                :       E]                  = n                  \       and |Z| = «!, it suffices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          numbers.]
to show that                                              X spans #Ui,                                       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                         x n ) (see Theorem IV.2.5). Consider the tower of
fields E C FCv„) C £(A- _i,jc ) C      C FUi,           *„) = K(x u         x n Since x„ is al-n             n
                                                                                                                                     •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .       .   ,        ).                                              3.               If     < d £ Q, then Aut Q(^) is the identity or is isomorphic to Z                                                                                                                                                                           2.

gebraic of degree < n over E (by the proof of Theorem 2.18), the set x^               <j < n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '   \                          j



spans E(x n ) over F (Theorem .6). Since E(x n -i,x n ) = E(Xr,)(x n -i), and x n ^ is algebra-                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4.               What is the Galois group of Q(V2,V3,a/5) over Q?
ic of degree < n -     over Ffe), the set             < <n -            spans E(x n _ u x n ) over
                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                   /                                                    1       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.               (a) If      < do Q, then Q(xjd) is Galois over Q.
E(x n ). The argument in the second paragraph of the proof of Theorem IV. 2.1 6 shows                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b)    C is Galois over R.
that the set x^xj        < / < n - 1 < j < n spans E(x n - U x n ) over E. This is the
                                              {
                                                                           :




                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                                      ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \




first step in an inductive proof, which is completed by similar arguments.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.                Let f/g £ K(x) with f/g §                                                      K and fig relatively prime in K[x] and consider the ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tension of                           K by K(x).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a)       x            is       algebraic over K(f/g) and [K{x)                                                                                               :       K(f/g)] =                 max (deg /,deg g).
Proposition 2.20. Let K be a field and let fi,                                                                                                                                                                         .       .   .           ,       f„              be the elementary symmetric                                                                                                        [Hint: x is a root of the nonzero polynomial <p(y) = (f g)g(y)                                                                                                                                                   — f(y) e
junctions in K(x b                                                    .    .           .   .   x„).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   show that if has degree max (deg/,deg g). Show that <p is irreducible as follows.
256                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                    3.        SPLITTING FIELDS, ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE AND NORMALITY                                                                                                         257


      Since f/g         is   transcendental over   K (why?) we may for convenience replace                                                                                    Aut L F = f| <j(Aut E F)<j-\
      K(f/g) by K(z) (z an indeterminate) and consider y? = zg(y) — f(y) e K(z)[y}. By
      Lemma III.6.13 <p is irreducible in K(z)[y] provided it is irreducible in tf[z][>>].                                     where a runs over Aut K F.
      The truth of this latter condition follows from the fact that <p is linear in z and f,g
                                                                                                                       16. If a £     S n then the map K(x u ...,*„)—> #(xi,
                                                                                                                                           ,                                                                                                                .       .       .       x n ) given by
      are relatively prime.]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,




            (b) If   E ^ K is an intermediate field, then [K(x)        :   E] is finite.                                                                                f(x U   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Xn)                           /(*,(!),          .       .       .           -Y^n))
             The assignment x\-^ f/g induces a homomorphism a K(x) —> K(x) such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


            (c)                                                                        :

                                                                                                                                                                        g(Xi,   .   .   .           Xn )                          g(x aa ),     •       •       •               ^(n))
      that ip(x)/\f/(x) (-> <p(f/g)/\p(f/g). a is a K automorphism of K(x) if and only if
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                                                           ,




      max (deg /,deg g) = 1.                                                                                                  is   a ^-automorphism of ^(xi,                                    .    .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x n ).
        (d) AutxA'W consists of all those automorphisms induced (as in (c)) by the
       assignment

                                        xh(ox + b)/{cx + d\                                                            3.     SPLITTING FIELDS, ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE AND NORMALITY
      where a,b,c,d e K and ad — be 9^ 0.                                                                                     We turn now to the problem of identifying and/or constructing Galois exten-
                                                                                                                      sions. Splitting fields, which constitute the principal theme of this section, will enable
 7.   Let G be the subset of Aui K K{x) consisting of the three automorphisms induced
      (as in 6 (c)) by x )— x, x |-> 1k/(1k        — x), x H (x — 1k)/x. Then G is a subgroup                         us to do this.           We first develop the basic properties of splitting fields and algebraic
                                                                                                                      closures (a special case of splitting fields). Then algebraic Galois extensions are char-
      of AuXkK(x). Determine the fixed field of G.
                                                                                                                      acterized in terms that do not explicitly mention the Galois group (Theorem 3.11),
 8.   Assume char K = and let G be the subgroup of Au\ K K(x) that is generated by                                    and the Fundamental Theorem is extended to the infinite dimensional algebraic case
      the automorphism induced by x |— X + 1a Then G is an infinite cyclic group.
                                                   >       .                                                          (Theorem 3.12). Finally normality and other characterizations of splitting fields are
      Determine the fixed field E of G. What is [K(x)            :   £]?                                              discussed. The so-called fundamental theorem of algebra (every polynomial equation
                                                                                                                      over the complex numbers has a solution) is proved in the appendix.
 9.   (a) If       K is an infinite field, then K(x) is Galois over K. [Hint: If #(x) is not Galois                       Let F be a field and / £ F[x] a polynomial of positive degree, /is said to split over F
      over K, then K(x) is finite dimensional over the fixed field E of Aut K K(x) by                                 (or to split in F[x]) if /can be written as a product of linear factors in Fix]; that is,
      Exercise 6(b). But Au\eK(x) = Aut K K(x) is infinite by Exercise 6(d), which con-                               / = Uo(x — U\)(x — u )                    •
                                                                                                                                                                         (x   — u n ) with u £ F.
                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                     x

      tradicts       Lemma 2.8.]
      (b) If       K is finite, then K(x) is not Galois over K. [Hint: If K(x) were Galois over
      K, then AutA-^W would be infinite by Lemma 2.9. But Aut K K(x) is finite by
                                                                                                                      Definition 3.1. Let               K be a field and f £ K[x] a polynomial ofpositive degree. An ex-
      Exercise 6(d).]
                                                                                                                      tension field       Fo/K is said to be a splitting field over K of the polynomial f iff splits in
10. If      K is an infinite field, then the only closed subgroups of A\x\ K K{x) are itself and                      Ffx] and F          = K(ui,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                        u M ) where Ui,                      .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      u n are the roots off in F.
                                                                                                                            Let S be a set ofpolynomials ofpositive degree in K[x]. An extension field ¥ ofK is
      its finite subgroups.        [Hint: see Exercises 6(b) and 9.]
                                                                                                                      said to be a splitting field over K of the set S of polynomials if every polynomial in S
11.   In the extension of         Q by Q(x), the intermediate field Q(x         2
                                                                                    ) is   closed, but   QU   3
                                                                                                                  )   splits in F[x] and         F is generated over K by the roots of all the polynomials in S.
      is    not.
                                                                                                                            EXAMPLES. The only roots of x - 2 over Q are ^2 and - ^2 and x - 2                   2                                                                                   2
12. If  E is an intermediate field of the extension such that E is Galois over K, Fis
                                                                                                                      = (x - y2)(* + V2 )- Therefore 0(^2) = Q(^2,-^2) is a splitting field of x - 2                                                                                                 2
      Galois over E, and every a e Aut K E is extendible to F, then F is Galois over K.
                                                                                                                      over Q. Similarly C is a splitting field of x 2                                                                 +   1   over R. However, if u is a root of an
13.   In the extension of an infinite field K by K(x,y), the intermediate field K(x) is                               irreducible fe K[x], K(u) need not be a splitting field of                                                                                            / For instance if u is the real
      Galois over K, but not stable (relative to K(x,y) and K). [See Exercise 9; compare                              cube root of 2 (the others being complex), then Q(w) (Z R, whence Q(w) is not a
      this result with        Lemma 2.13.]                                                                            splitting field of x 3        — 2 over Q.
14.   Let F be a finite dimensional Galois extension of K and let L and                     M be two     inter-
                                                                                                                            REMARKS. If F is a splitting field of 5 over K, then F = K(X), where X is the
      mediate fields.
                                                                                                                      set of all roots of polynomials in the subset 5 of K[x]. Theorem 1.12 immediately
            (a) Au\ LM F = AuUF f) Aut M F;
                                                                                                                      implies that F is algebraic over K (and finite dimensional if S, and hence X, is a finite
            (b) AutL n mE = A\xi L F V Aui M F\
                                                                                                                      set).   Note that if 5 is finite, say 5 =/,/, ...,/,), then a splitting field of S coin-
            (c) What conclusion can be drawn if A\x\ L F D Aui M F = 1?
                                                                                                                                                                                                     {


                                                                                                                      cides with a splitting field of the single polynomial  /=//-• -fn (Exercise 1). This
15. If      F is a finite dimensional Galois extension of K and E is an intermediate field,                           fact will be used frequently in the sequel without explicit mention. Thus the splitting
      then there is a unique smallest field L such that E CI L   d Fand L is Galois over                              field of a set 5 of polynomials will be chiefly of interest when S either consists of a

      A^;   furthermore                                                                                               single polynomial or is infinite. It will turn out that every [finite dimensional]
258                      CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                             3.    SPLITTING FIELDS, ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE AND NORMALITY                                                      259


algebraic Galois extension is in fact a particular kind of splitting field of a [finite] set                     (i)   F is algebraic over K and F is algebraically closed;
of polynomials.                                                                                                 (ii)   F is a splitting field over K of the set of all [irreducible] polynomials in K[x].

      The obvious question to be answered next is whether every set of polynomials                              PROOF. Exercise; also see Exercises 9, 10.
has a splitting field. In the case of a single polynomial (or equivalently a finite set of
polynomials), the answer is relatively easy.                                                                    An extension field F of a field K that satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theo-
                                                                                                      rem 3.4 is called an algebraic closure of K. For example, C = R(/) is an algebraic
                                                                                                      closure of R. Clearly, if F is an algebraic closure of                  K and S is any set of polynomials
Theorem 3.2. 7/K is a field and f s K[x] has degree n > 1 then there exists a splitting
                                                                ,

                                                                                                      in K[x], then the subfield                     E of F generated by K and all roots of polynomials in S is a
field ¥ of i with [F K] < n!
                                                                                                                                                 K by Theorems 3.3 and 3.4. Thus the existence of arbitrary
                         :

                                                                                                      splitting field of S over
                                                                                                      splitting fields over a field                  K is equivalent to the existence of an algebraic closure of K.
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Use induction on n = deg/. If n =                     1   or if /splits over
                                                                                                          The chief difficulty in proving that every field K has an algebraic closure is set-
K, then F = AT is a splitting field. If n > 1 and / does not split over AT, let g s K[x] be
                                                                                                      theoretic rather than algebraic. The basic idea is to apply Zorn's Lemma to
an irreducible factor of/ of degree greater than one. By Theorem 1.10 there is a simple                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                      suitably chosen set of algebraic extension fields of AT. 2 To do this we need                 *


extension field K(u) of K such that u is a root of g and [K(u) K] = deg g > 1 Then
                                                                         :                  .




by Theorem III. 6.6, f = (x — u)h with h e K(u)[x] of degree n — 1. By induction
there exists a splitting field F of // over AT(w) of dimension at most (n        — 1)! Show that
                                                                                                      Lemma 3.5. IfF is an algebraic extension field o/K, then \F\ < K |K|.
Fis a splitting field of /over AT (Exercise 3) of dimension [F K] = [F AT(w)][#(w)
                                                                     :            :             :




< (n - l)!(deg*) < #i!
                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Let T be the set of monic polynomials of positive de-
      Proving the existence of a splitting field of an infinite set of polynomials is con-
                                                                                                      gree in K[x}. We first show that \T\ = K  For each n e N* let Tn be the set of all
                                                                                                                                                                             |AT|.

                                                                                                      polynomials in T of degree n. Then \Tn = |A>|, where Kn = K X K X           K (n
siderably more difficult.      We approach the proof obliquely by introducing a special                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   •




                                                                                                      factors), since every polynomial /= x n + a n ^x n ~      a e Tn is completely           l
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -\
case of such a splitting field (Theorem 3.4) which is of great importance in its own                                                                                                                    1-

                                                                                                      determined by its n coefficients a ,a u a n -\ e K. For each n e N* let fn :Tn ^> n
                                                                                                                                                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     K
right.                                                                                                                                                                       ,




      Note: The reader who is interested only in splitting fields of a single polynomial
                                                                                                      be a bijection. Since the sets Tn [resp.      n
                                                                                                                                                      ]                              K
                                                                                                                                                        are mutually disjoint, the map

(i.e. finite    dimensional splitting fields) should skip to Theorem 3.8. Theorem 3.12                / :T =  |J  Tn -> |J Kn
                                                                                                                              given by /(«) = fn (u) for u e 7*„, is a well-defined bijection.
                                                                                                                                                 ,

                                                                                                                       neN*       neN*
should be omitted and Theorems 3.8-3.16 read in the finite dimensional case. The                      Therefore \T\ = \\J             K = K \K\ by Introduction, Theorem 8.12(H).
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                             \




proof of each of these results is either divided in two cases (finite and infinite dimen-                                      neS*

sional) or is directly applicable to both cases. The only exception is the proof of
                                                                                                          Next we show that \F\ < \T\, which will complete the proof. For each irreducible
(ii) => (i)    in Theorem 3.14; an alternate proof is suggested in Exercise 25.                       fe T, choose an ordering of the distinct roots of /in F. Define a map F — > T X N* as
                                                                                                      follows. If a s F, then a is algebraic over                            K
                                                                                                                                                  by hypothesis, and there exists a unique
                                                                                                      irreducible monic polynomial /s T with f(a) =     (Theorem 1 .6). Assign to a e F the
Theorem 3.3. The following conditions on a field F are equivalent.                                    pair (/,/) zT           XN*
                                                                                                                          where a is the ith root of /in the previously chosen ordering of
                                                                                                      the roots of /in F. Verify that this map F-> T X N* is well defined and injective.
       (i)    Every nonconstant polynomial f e F[x] has a root in F;                                  Since Tis infinite, \F\                < \TX N*| = |7||N*| = |T|K = \T\ by Theorem 8.11 of the
      (ii)    every nonconstant polynomial f e F[x] splits over F;                                    Introduction.
      (iii)   every irreducible polynomial in F[x] has degree one;
      (iv) there is no algebraic extension field   ofF (except F itself);
       (v) there exists a subfield   Ko/F such that F is algebraic over K and every poly-             Theorem 3.6. Every field K has an algebraic closure. Any two algebraic closures ofK
nomial in K[x] splits in F[x].
                                                                                                      are ^-isomorphic.

      PROOF. Exercise; see Section III. 6 and Theorems 1.6, 1.10, 1.12 and 1.13.
                                                                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF. Choose a set S such that K |AT| < \S\ (this can always
      A field that satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.3 is said to be
                                                                                                      be done by Theorem 8.5 of the Introduction). Since |A|    K |AT| (Introduction,                   <
                                                                                                      Theorem 8.11) there is by Definition 8.4 of the Introduction an injective map
algebraically closed. For example, we shall show that the field C of complex num-
                                                                                                      B :K-^S. Consequently we may assume K C S (if not, replace 5 by the union
                                                                                                                                                                                of
bers is algebraically closed (Theorem 3.19).
                                                                                                      S - Im 6 and #).

                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                As anyone familiar with the paradoxes of set theory (Introduction, Section 2) might
Theorem 3.4. // F is an extension field of K, then the following conditions are                       suspect, the class of all algebraic extension fields of                            K need not be a set, and therefore, cannot
equivalent.                                                                                           be used in such an argument.
260                    CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                    3.    SPLITTING FIELDS, ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE AND NORMALITY                                                        261


      Let S be the class of all fields E such that E is a subset of S and E is an algebraic                                reducible in L[x]. If v is a root of ag in M, then by Theorem 1.8 a extends to an iso-
extension field of K. Such a field Eis completely determined by the subset E of S and                                      morphism r K(u)                      ^
                                                                                                                                                  L(v) with t(u) = v. Since [K(u) K] = deg g > 1 (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                   :                                                          :



the binary operations of addition               and multiplication in E.                    Now addition [resp.            1.6), we must have [F    K(u)] < n (Theorem 1.2). Since F is a splitting field of /over
                                                                                                                                                                    :



multiplication] is a function <p     :   E X F — E [resp. \p E X E —> E]. Hence:                       <p   [resp. i/']    K(u) and Af is a splitting field of af over L(v) (Exercise 2), the induction hypothesis
may be identified with its graph, a certain subset of                              EXEXEdSXSXS                    (see     implies that r extends to an isomorphism F                               = M.
Introduction, Section 4). Consequently, there is an injective map r from S into the                                               If 5 is arbitrary, let S consist of all triples (E,N,t), where                           E is an intermediate field
setP of all subsets of the setS X (S X S X S) X (S X S X S), given by E\-+ (E,<p#).                                        of F and AT,           N
                                                                                                                                            an intermediate field of
                                                                                                                                                       is                and L, and r          M                      :   E — TV is an isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *

Now Im r is actually a set since Im r is a subclass of the set P. Since S is the image of                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                           that extends a. Define (E u u n) < (F2 ,A^2 ,r->) if  (Z F2                ^           ,       M C N and r E = n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2       2   |   Y


Im r under the function r -1 :Imr->S, the axioms of set theory guarantee that S is                                         Verify that S is a nonempty partially ordered set in which every chain has an upper
in fact a set.                                                                                                            bound in S. By Zorn's Lemma there is a maximal element (F ,Af ,r ) of S. We claim
      Note that S ^      since   K £ S. Partially order the set S by defining E\ < E if and                  2             that F= F and                    M
                                                                                                                                              = M, so that r F                                 ^M
                                                                                                                                                                     is the desired extension of a. If F ^ F,
                                                                                                                                                                                       :




only if E2 is an extension field of E u Verify that every chain in S has an upper bound                                   then some /eS does not split over F Since all the roots of /lie in F, F contains a
                                                                                                                                                                                           .




(the union of the fields in the chain will do). Therefore by Zorn's Lemma there exists                                    splitting field Fi of                 / over F    .   Similarly,     M contains a splitting field Mi of r /= a/
a maximal element F of S.                                                                                                 over     M The .         first part of the proof shows that r               can be extended to an isomorphism
      We claim that F is algebraically closed. If not, then some / £ F[x] does not split                                  n   :   Fi    ^ Mi. But this means that (Fi,M,,n) S and (F ,M            s             ,r ) < (Fi,Mi,n) which
over F. Thus there is a proper algebraic extension F  = F(u) of F, where u is a root of                                   contradicts the maximality of (F ,M ,r ).                              A similar argument using r _1 works if
/ which  does not lie in F (Theorem  1.10). Furthermore F is an algebraic extension of                                     M ^ M.
K by Theorem 1.13. Therefore, |F - F\ < \F < K \K\ < \S\ by Lemma 3.5. Since
                                                                 \




|F| < |F   < \S\ and \S\ = \(S - F) U F\ = \S - F\ + |F|, we must have \S\ = \S - F\
           |




by Theorem 8.10 of the Introduction. Thus \F — F\ < \S — F\ and the identity map
                                                                                                                          Corollary 3.9. Let Kbea field and S a set ofpolynomials (ofpositive degree) in K[x].
on F may be extended to an injective map of sets f F — S. Then Fi = Im f may be
                                                                           :         >

                                                                                                                          Then any two splitting fields ofS over K are K-isomorphic. In particular, any two
made into a field by defining £(a) + £(b) — £(a + b) and £(a)£(b) = £(ab). Clearly
                                                                                                                          algebraic closures ofK are ^-isomorphic.
Fi is an extension field of F, Fi (Z S and f F —* Fi is an F-isomorphism of fields.
                                                        :



Consequently, since F is a proper algebraic extension of F(and hence of K), so is Fi.
This means that Fi s S and F < Fu which contradicts the maximality of F. Therefore,                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Apply Theorem 3.8 with a =                                                   l   K The last statement is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




F is algebraically closed and algebraic over K and hence an algebraic closure of K.                                       then an immediate consequence of Theorem 3.4(ii).
The uniqueness statement of the theorem is proved in Corollary 3.9 below.
                                                                                                                                  In order to characterize Galois extensions in terms of splitting fields, we must first
                                                                                                                          consider a              phenomenon that occurs only in the case of fields of nonzero char-
Corollary 3.7.     IfK is a field and S a set ofpolynomials (ofpositive degree) in K[x],                                  acteristic. Recall that if                    K is any field, / is a nonzero polynomial in K[x], and c is a
then there exists a splitting field ofS over K.                                                                           root of / then / = (x — c) m g(x) where g(c)                          ^ and m is a uniquely determined
                                                                                                                          positive integer. The element c is a simple or multiple root of /according asm                                            =   1   or
      PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                    m >       1   (see p. 161).



      We turn now to the question of the uniqueness of splitting fields and algebraic
closures. The answer will be an immediate consequence of the following result on the                                      Definition 3.10. Let K be a field and f s K[x] an irreducible polynomial. The poly-
extendibility of   isomorphisms (see Theorem                         1.8       and the remarks preceding it).             nomial f is said to be separable if in some splitting field of f over K every root off is a
                                                                                                                          simple root.
                                                                                                                                  IfF is an extension field ofK and u £ F is algebraic over K, then u is said to be
Theorem 3.8. Let a       :   K — L be an isomorphism of fields, S = {fij a set of poly-
                                 >                                                                                        separable over               K provided its irreducible polynomial is separable. If every element ofF
nomials (of positive degree) in K[x], and S' =                       jof;}         the corresponding set    of poly-      is separable over                 K, then F is said to be a separable extension ofK.
nomials in L[x]. IfF is a splitting field ofS over              K and M is a splitting field ofS' over L,
then a is extendible to an isomorphism F             = M.                                                                      REMARKS, (i) In view of Corollary 3.9 it is clear that a separable polynomial
                                                                                                                          /£ K[x] has no multiple roots in any splitting field of /over K. (ii) Theorem III.6.10
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose first that S consists of a single polynomial                                               shows that an irreducible polynomial in K[x] is separable if and only if its derivative
fe K[x] and proceed by induction on n = [F K}. If n = 1, then F = K and / splits
                                                            :
                                                                                                                          is nonzero, whence every irreducible polynomial is separable if char K =          (Exercise
over K. This implies that af splits over L and hence that L = M. Thus cr itself is the                                    III. 6.3). Hence every algebraic extension field of a field of characteristic is separable.
desired isomorphism F =         K ^> L = M. If n > 1, then / must have an irreducible                                         Separability is defined here only for irreducible polynomials, (iv) According to
                                                                                                                          (iii)

factor g of degree greater than 1        .   Let u be a root of g in F. Then verify that ag is ir-                        Definition 3.10 a separable extension field of K is necessarily algebraic over K. There
                                                                                ;




262                                     CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                       3.           SPLITTING FIELDS, ALGEBRAIC CLOSURE AND NORMALITY                                                          263


is    a definition of separability for possibly nonalgebraic extension fields that agrees                                                                                               [F    :   K = |AuUF| by Artin's Theorem 2.15 and the Fundamental Theorem. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ]


with this one in the algebraic case (Section VI. 2). Throughout this chapter, however,                                                                                                  in order to show that   F is Galois over K (that is, K = K ) suffices to show that                                             it

we shall use only Definition 3.10.                                                                                                                                                      [F    :   K] = \Aut K F\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  We proceed by induction on n = [F              K], with the case n = 1 being trivial. If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :



                                                                                                                                                                                        n >        1 ,       then one of the gu say g u has degree s > 1 (otherwise all the roots of the {
   EXAMPLES, x 2 + 1 £ Q[x] is separable since x + 1 = (x + /)(* - /) in C[x].                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g
                                                                                                                                                                                        lie in         Kand F = K). Let weFbea root of gu then [K(u)                                                              K] = deg gi = s by Theo-
On the other hand, the polynomial x + overZ has no simple roots; in fact it is
                                                                    2
                                                                                    1            2
                                                                                                                                                                                        rem 1.6 and the number of distinct roots of gi is s since gi is separable. The second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :




not even irreducible since x 2                       +         = (x + l) in Z [x].       2
                                                           1                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                        paragraph of the proof of Lemma 2.8 (with L = K            = K(u) and /= gi) shows                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                        that there     an injective map from the set of all left cosets of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is                                      = Am* (U )F in                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                       Aut^F to the set of all roots of gi in F, given by <tH\-^> a(u). Therefore,
Theorem 3.11. //F is an extension field o/K, then the following statements are                                                                                                         [Aut A F H] < s. Now if v e F is any other root of g u there is an isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                             :



equivalent.                                                                                                                                                                            r K(u)
                                                                                                                                                                                          :                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                    K(v) with t(u) = v and r # = 1 K by Corollary 1 .9. Since F is a splitting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |




                                                                                                                                                                                       field of {gi,      g over #(«) and over K(v) (Exercise 2), r extends to an automor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   t ]


              (i)     F is algebraic and Galois over K                                                                                                                                 phism o- s Aut^F with a(u) = v (Theorem 3.8). Therefore, every root of gi is the im-
          (ii)        F is separable over K and F is a splitting field over K of a set S ofpolynomials                                                                                 age of some coset of Hand [Aut*F H] = s. Furthermore, F is a splitting field over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :



in    K[x];                                                                                                                                                                            K(u) of the set of all irreducible factors hj (in K(u)[x]) of the polynomials gi (Exer-
          (iii)       F is a splitting field over K of a set T of separable polynomials in K[x].                                                                                       cise 4). Each hj is clearly separable since it divides some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g Since [F K(u)] = n/s < n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {.                   :



                                                                                                                                                                                       the induction hypothesis implies that [F                                                         :   K(u)]   = |AutK(u)F| = \H\. Therefore,
          REMARKS. If F is finite dimensional over K, then statements (ii) and (iii) can be                                                                                                                      [F           K] = [F               K(u)][K(u)       K] = \H\s = |tf|[Aut*F                                  = |Aut*F|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :                         :                :                                                     //]
                                                                                                                     F is a splitting field over K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :

slightly sharpened. In particular (iii) may be replaced by:
of a polynomial feK[x] whose irreducible factors are separable (Exercise                                                                                                     13).      and the proof is complete.


          PROOF OF 3.11. (i) => (ii) and                            (iii).          If u e F has irreducible polynomial /, then
the first part of the proof of Lemma 2.13 (withF = F) carries over verbatim and
shows that / splits in F[x] into a product of distinct linear factors. Hence u is separ-                                                                                               Theorem 3.12. (Generalized Fundamental Theorem) IfF is an algebraic Galois ex-
able over K. Let     i\ i e 1} be a basis of F over K and for each / £ / let £ K[x] be the
                                                                                                                                                                                       tension field ofK, then there is a one-to-one correspondence between the set of all
                                        \
                               {



irreducible polynomial of Vi. The preceding remarks show that each f is separable                                                                                                      intermediate fields of the extension and the set of all closed subgroups of the Galois

and splits in F[x]. Therefore F is a splitting field over K of S = fi i e I\.                                                        {   \
                                                                                                                                                                                       group Aut K F (given by EhE' = Aut E F) such that:
    (ii) => (iii) Let feS and let g e K[x] be a monic irreducible factor of /. Since
                                                                                                                                                                                               F is Galois over every intermediate fieldE, but E is Galois over K ifand only if
                                                                                                                                                                                              (ii )
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;


                                                                                         /
splits in F[x], g must be the irreducible polynomial of some u e F. Since F is separable                                                                                               the corresponding subgroup E' is normal in G = Aut K F; in this case G/E' is (iso-

over K, g is necessarily separable. It follows that F is a splitting field over K of the set                                                                                           morphic to) the Galois group Aut K E ofE over K.
T of separable polynomials consisting of all monic irreducible factors (in K[x]) of
polynomials in 5 (see Exercise 4).
                                                                                                                                                                                          REMARKS. Compare this Theorem, which is proved below, with Theorem 2.5.
   (iii) => (i) F is algebraic over K since any splitting field over K is an algebraic ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                       The analogue of (i) in the Fundamental Theorem is false in the infinite dimensional
tension. If u e F             — K, then u e K(v u               .   .   .
                                                                            ,
                                                                                v n ) with each v r a root of some fie                           Thy the                               case (Exercise 16). If [FK] is infinite there are always subgroups of Aut*F that are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :

definition of a splitting field                           and Theorem                        1.3(vii).           Thus              ueE = K(u u       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                             ur)
                                                                                                                                                                                       not closed. The proof of this fact depends on an observation of Krull[64]: when F is
where the u { are all the roots of fu                                                   in F.   Hence [E K] is finite by Theorem
                                                                                                                         :
                                                                                                                                                                                       algebraic over K, it is possible to make Aut K F into a compact topological group in
1.12. Since each              f splits in F, E is a splitting field over Kof the finite set fu                                               {
                                                                                                                                                 •       -       .   ,   fn    \   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                       such a way that a subgroup is topologically closed if and only if it is closed in the
or equivalently, of                    /= fifr
                                  Assume for now that the theorem is true in the
                                                 -   •
                                                         fi-                                                                                                                           sense of Section 2 (that is,                                      H = H").             It is    not difficult to show that some infinite
finite dimensional case. Then E is Galois over K and hence there exists r £ Aut K E
                                                                                                                                                                                       compact topological groups contain subgroups that are not topologically closed. A
such that t(u) ^ u. Since F is a splitting field of T over E (Exercise 2), r extends to an
                                                                                                                                                                                       fuller discussion, with examples, is given in P. J. McCarthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [40; pp. 60-63]. Also see
automorphism a e Aut K F such that a(u) = t(u) ^ u by Theorem 3.8. Therefore, u
                                                                                                                                                                                       Exercise 5.11 below.
(which was an arbitrary element of F — K) is not in the fixed field of AuU-F; that is,
F is Galois over K.
   The argument in the preceding paragraph shows that we need only prove the                                                                                                              PROOF OF 3.12. In view of Theorem 2.7 we need only show that every inter-
theorem when [F K] is finite. In this case there exist a finite number of polynomials
                                   :                                                                                                                                                   mediate field E is closed in order to establish the one-to-one correspondence. By
gi,   .
       g £ T such that F is a splitting field of
          .   .
                  ,   t                                     g over K (otherwise F                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                     ,       t )                                                       Theorem 3.1 1 F is the splitting field over       of a set T of separable polynomials.          K
would be infinite dimensional over K). Furthermore Aut A F is a finite group by                                                                                                        Therefore, F is also a splitting field of T over E (Exercise 2). Hence by Theorem 3.11
Lemma 2.8. If K is the fixed field of Aut^F, then F is a Galois extension of K with                                                                                                    again, F is Galois over E\ that is,                                       E is closed.
                                                     ;




264                                         CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                  APPENDIX: THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA                                                               265


        (ii')   Since every intermediate field E is algebraic over K, the first paragraph of the                                        Corollary 3.15. Let F bean algebraic extension field ofK. Then F is Galois over K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            //
proof of Theorem 2.5(ii) carries over to show that E is Galois over K if and only if E'                                                 and only ifF is normal and separable over K. If char K = 0, then F is Galois over K //
is normal in AutxF.                                                                                                                     and only ifF is normal over K.
    If E = E" is Galois over K, so that E' is normal in G = Aut^F, then E is a
stable intermediate field  by Lemma 2.11. Therefore, Lemma 2.14 implies that
                                                                                                                                              PROOF. Exercise; use Theorems 3.11 and 3.14.
G/E' = Aui K F/Aui E F is isomorphic to the subgroup of A\\i K E consisting of those
automorphisms that are extendible to F. But F is a splitting field over K (Theorem
3.11) and hence over E also (Exercise 2). Therefore, every ^-automorphism in
Aut^F extends to F by Theorem 3.8 and G/E'       Aui K E.                              ^                                                Theorem 3.16. IfF is an algebraic extension field ofK, then there exists an extension
                                                                                                                                       field F of E such that
        We return now to splitting fields and characterize them in terms of a property
that has already been used on several occasions.
                                                                                                                                               (i)      F is normal over K;
                                                                                                                                              (ii)      no proper subfield ofF containing E is normal over K;
                                                                                                                                             (iii)      ifF is separable over K, then F is Galois over K;
                                                                                                                                             (iv)       [F K] is finite if and only if[E K] is finite.
                                                                                                                                                           :


                   An algebraic extension field F ofK is normal over K (or a normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                            :

Definition 3.13.
                                                                                                                                       The field F is uniquely determined up to an F-isomorphism.
extension) // every irreducible polynomial in K[x] that has a root in F actually splits
in F[x].
                                                                                                                                             The field F in Theorem 3.16 is sometimes called the normal closure of E over K.


                                                                                                                                             PROOF OF 3.16. (i)LetA-=                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                      u ,\ i e I\ be a basis of £ over AT and let f e K[x] be
                                                                                                                                                                                                       x

Theorem 3.14. IfF is an algebraic extension field ofK, then the following statements                                                   the irreducible polynomial of w                       If   F is a splitting field of 5 =
are equivalent.
                                                                                                                                                                                       ? .
                                                                                                                                                                                                        f £ /) over £, then               (   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /

                                                                                                                                       F is also a splitting field of S over K (Exercise 3), whence F is normal over K by
                                                                                                                                       Theorem 3.14. (iii) If E is separable over K, then each f is separable. Therefore F is
          (i)   F is normal over K
                                                                                                                                       Galois over K by Theorem 3.11. (iv) If [E                   K] is finite, then so is X and hence S. This
         (ii)   F is a splitting field over K of some set ofpolynomials in K[x];                                                                                                                                    :




   (iii) ifKis any algebraic closure ofK containing F, then for any K-monomorphism
                                                                                                                                       implies that [F              :   K] is finite (by the Remarks after Definition 3.1). (ii) A subfield FQ
                                                                                                                                       of F that contains E necessarily contains the root u { of
offields cr F —> K, Im a = F so that a is actually a K-automorphism ofF.
                              :                                                                                                                                                                  f e S for every                                              /.   If   F is
                                                                                                                                       normal over K (so that each / splits in F by definition), then F                                               C F and hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                                                       F= F         .



        REMARKS. The theorem remains true if the algebraic closure K in (iii) is re-                                                         Finally let Fi be another extension field of                               E with properties (i) and (ii). Since Fi
placed by any normal extension of K containing F (Exercise 21). See Exercise 25                                                        is   normal over AT and contains each wF must contain a splitting field F of S over K
                                                                                                                                                                                                      t ,       x                                        2
for a direct                          proof of (ii) => (i) in the finite dimensional case.                                             with E c F F is normal over K (Theorem 3.14), whence F = F by (ii). Therefore
                                                                                                                                                           2.       2                                                                 2       x


                                                                                                                                       both Fand F are splitting fields of S over tfand hence of 5 over E (Exercise 2). By
                                                                                                                                                                x




  PROOF OF 3.14. (i) => (ii) F is a splitting field over K of [feK[x] /e/|,                                                            Theorem 3.8 the identity map on E extends to an F-isomorphism F^F,.
                                                                                                                       |




where {u £ /} is a basis of F over K and /• is the irreducible polynomial of u
                 x   :    |
                                  i                                                                                              x .


      =>  Let F be a splitting field of f
        (ii)             (iii)             £ /| over K and a  F — AT a A'-mono-
                                                                     |    \\   i                   :   >


morphism of fields. If u e F is a root of f then so is a(u) (same proof as Theorem 2.2).
                                                                s,


By hypothesis / splits in F, say / = c(x — u )- (x — un ) (u e F; c £ K). Since K[x] is
                                                                                   •   •
                                                                          Y                    x
                                                                                                                                       APPENDIX: THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA
a unique factorization domain (Corollary III. 6.4), aim) must be one of u u        u n for                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                       ,



every / (see Theorem III. 6. 6). Since a is injective, it must simply permute the u But                                    x .             The theorem referred to in the title states that the field C of complex numbers is
Fis generated over K by all the roots of all the f. It follows from Theorem 1.3 that                                                   algebraically closed (that is, every polynomial equation over C can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             completely
cr(F) = F and hence that a s Aut K F.                                                                                                  solved.) Every               known proof of this fact depends at some point on results from
    (iii) => (i) Let K be an algebraic closure of F (Theorem 3.6). Then A" is algebraic                                                analysis.  We shall assume:
over K (Theorem 1.13). Therefore K is an algebraic closure of K containing F                                                                 (A) every positive real number has a real positive square root;
(Theorem 3.4). Let ft K[x] be irreducible with a root u £ F. By construction K con-                                                       (B) every polynomial in R[x] of odd degree has a root in R (that is,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               every irre-
tains all the roots of /. If v e                     K is any root of /then there is a AT-isomorphism of fields                        ducible polynomial in R[x] of degree greater than one has even degree).
a   :   K(u)    ^ K(v) with a(u) = v (Corollary                          1.9), which extends to a ^-automorphism                       Assumption (A) follows from the construction of the real numbers from the rationals
of Kby Theorems 3.4 and 3.8 and Exercise 2. a   F is a monomorphism F —> AT and            |                                           and assumption (B) is a corollary of the Intermediate Value Theorem of elementary
by hypothesis a(F) = F. Therefore, v = a(u) e F, which implies that / splits in F.                                                     calculus; see Exercise III.6.16. We begin by proving a special case of a theorem that
Hence F is normal over K.                                                                                                              will be discussed below (Proposition 6.15).
                                                                                                                                                 /



266                             CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                           APPENDIX: THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA                                                                                       267


 Lemma 3.17. IfF is a finite dimensional separable extension of an infinite field K,                                          by assumption (B). Therefore, uzR and [Aut R F H] = [E R] = 1, whence                                         :               :



then F = K(u) for some ueF.                                                                                                   Aut R F -                  H
                                                                                                                                         and IAlUr/7 = 2 n Consequently, the subgroup A\\X C F of Aut n F has
                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         .




                                                                                                                              order 2 m for some m (0 < m < n).
                                                                                                                                            Suppose m > 0. Then by the First Sylow Theorem II. 5. 7 Autc^has a subgroup/
   SKETCH OF PROOF. By Theorem 3.16 there is a finite dimensional Galois
                                                                                                                              of index 2; let En be the fixed field of J. By the Fundamental Theorem E
extension field Fi of K that contains F. The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 implies that                                                                                                                                                                                                    is   an ex-
AuXkFi is finite and that the extension of K by Fi has only finitely many intermediate
                                                                                                                              tension of C with dimension [Aut c F\J] = 2, which contradicts Lemma 3.18.
                                                                                                                              Therefore, m =   and AuX^F = 1. The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 implies that
fields.    Therefore, there can be only a finite number of intermediate fields in the ex-
                                                                                                                              IF C] = [Autc/7 1J = \Aut c F\ = 1, whence F = C.
tension of K by F.
                                                                                                                                        :                                     :




      Since [F     :   K) is finite, we can choose u s F such that \K{u)                     :       K) is maximal. If
K(u) ^ F, there exists            v e F — K(u). Consider all intermediate fields of the form

K(u -f av) with a e K. Since K is infinite and there are only finitely many intermediate                                      Corollary 3.20.  £rm- /7ro/?er algebraic extension field of the field of real numbers is
fields,there exist a,b e K such that a ^ b and K(u + av) = K(u -f bv). Therefore                                              isomorphic to the field of complex numbers.
(a - b)v = (u + or) - (u -f 6t) e A'(w + av).          Since a ^ b, we have r =
   _ D yi ( a — b) v e K(u + at ), whence u = (u + or) - or £             -f or). Conse-
                                                                                                                                 PROOF. If F is an algebraic extension of R and u e F - R has irreducible poly-
quently K      C               C            + or), whence              + av)   :   tf]   >           :   K}. This contra-
                                                                                                                              nomial fz R[x] of degree greater than one, then /splits over C by Theorem 3.19. If
 dicts the choice of u.                 Hence K(u) — F.                                                                       v e C is a root off then by Corollary 1 .9 the identity map on R extends to an isomor-
                                                                                                                              phism R(u)       R(i?)      ^                       c
                                                                                                                                                       C. Since [R(i?) R] = [R(«) R] > 1 and [C R] = 2, we       :                  :                                       :



                                                                                                                              must have [R(i?) R] - 2 and R(v) = C. Therefore, F is an algebraic extension of the
                                                                                                                                                                      :




                                                                                                                              algebraically closed field R(u)                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                               C. But an algebraically closed field has no algebraic
Lemma 3.18. There are no extension fields of dimension 2 over the field of complex                                            extensions except itself (Theorem 3.3). Thus F = R(u)      C.                                                 ^
numbers.


      SKETCH OF PROOF. It                         is   easy to see that an> extension field F of dimension
                                                                                                                                                                                                             EXERCISES
2 over C would necessarily be of the form F  = C(u) for any u e F - C. By Theorem
1.6 u would be the root of an irreducible monic polynomial fe C[x] of degree 2. To                                                      Note: Unless stated otherwise F is always an extension field of the field K and S
complete the proof we need only show that no such / can exist.      _____                                                     is    a set of polynomials (of positive degree) in K\x].

     For each a + bi e C = R(/) the positive real numbers \(a -f- \a + b ) y 2\ and                       2    2



   — a + \# + b2 )/2\ have real positive square roots c and d respectively by as-
               2
                                                                                                                               1    .
                                                                                                                                            F is a splitting field over AT of a finite set \fi,...,fn of polynomials in K[x] if                 ]
j(
                                                                                                                                            and only if F is a splitting field over K of the single polynomial / - //• -/n
sumption (A). Verify that with a proper choice of signs (±c ± di) = a -f 6/. Hence               2                                                                                                                                                                                          .




every element of C has a square root in C. Consequently, if /= x + sx + t e C[.v],
                                                                2
                                                                                                                               2.           If   F is a splitting field of S over K and £ is an intermediate field, then F is a
then / has roots ( — 5 db ^s 2 — 4t)/2 in C, whence / splits over C. Thus there are no                                                      splitting field of S over £.
irreducible monic polynomials of degree 2 in C[*].
                                                                                                                               3.           (a) Let E be an intermediate field of the extension K C F and assume that
                                                                                                                                            E = K(u u    ,u where the u are (some of the) roots of fe K[x]. Then F is a
                                                                                                                                                              .   .       .       r)                         x


                                                                                                                                            splitting field of /over                                if   and only if F is a splitting field of /over E.
Theorem 3.19. (The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra) The field of complex numbers                                                             (b)      Extend part (a) to splitting fields of arbitrary sets of polynomials.
is algebraically           closed.
                                                                                                                               4. If          F is a splitting field over K of 5, then F is also a splitting field over K of the set
     PROOF. In order to show that every nonconstant f e C[x] splits over C,                                              it
                                                                                                                                            T of all irreducible factors of polynomials in S.
suffices by Theorem       to prove that C has no finite dimensional extensions except
                                1   .   1
                                                                                                                               5.           If       £       has degree /? and F is a splitting field of /over K, then [F                                                   K] divides «!.
                 R] = 2 and char R =     every finite dimensional extension field E of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :

itself. Since [C       :                                                                                             ]




C is a finite dimensional separable extension of R (Theorem 1.2). Consequently, £,                                             6.           Let A: be a field such that for every extension field F the maximal algebraic ex-
is   contained in a finite dimensional Galois extension field F of R by Theorem 3.16.                                                       tension of       K contained in F (see Theorem                            1 . 1 4) is   K itself. Then K is algebraically
We need only show that F = C in order to conclude £\ = C.                                                                                   closed.
    The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 shows that Autp/7 is a finite group. By Theorems
       and 2.5 Aut R F has a Sylow 2-subgroup H of order 2 n (n > 0) and odd index,
II. 5. 7
                                                                                                                               7.       If F is algebraically closed and E consists of all elements in F that are algebraic
whose fixed field E has odd dimension, [E R] = [Aut K ^ H}. E is separable over R
                                                               :                     :
                                                                                                                                         over K, then E is an algebraic closure of K [see Theorem 1.14].
(since char R = 0), whence E = R(u) by Lemma 3.17. Thus the irreducible poly-                                                  8.       No finite field K is algebraically closed. [Hint: If K = {a                                                 ,   .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            an   \   consider
nomial of u has odd degree [E R] = [R(u) R] (Theorem .6). This degree must be 1
                                              :                    :
                                                                                     1                                                  ax + {x — tfoX-*" —          — On) £ K[x], where a ^ 0.]
                                                                                                                                                                                       fli) -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x
                                                                                                              .




268                                             CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                           4.        THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL                                        269



 9.   F is an algebraic closure of K if and only if F is algebraic over K and for every                                   1   7.    If an intermediate field                      E is normal over K, then E is stable (relative to F and AT).
      algebraic extension E of K there exists a AT-monomorphism E-^F.
                                                                                                                          18.      Let F be normal over K and E an intermediate field. Then E is normal over K if

10. F is an algebraic closure of                                K if and only if F is algebraic over K and for every               and only if E is stable [see Exercise 17]. Furthermore Aui K F/E'     Aut A-£.                       ^
      algebraic field extension                                E of another field K, and isomorphism of fields            19.       Part (ii) or (ii)' of the Fundamental Theorem (2.5 or 3.12) is equivalent to: an
      o   \   K — K, a extends to a monomorphism E—>F.
                    x
                         >
                                                                                                                                    intermediate field E is normal over K if and only if the corresponding subgroup
                                                                                                                                   FJ     is       normal in      G = Aui h F in which case G E' ^ Aui K E. [See Exercise 18.]
                                                                                                                                                                                                              f
11. (a)        If u u        .   .   .    ,    u n z F are separable over. AT, then          ...,«„) is a separable ex-
      tension of K.                                                                                                       20. If F is normal over an intermediate field                               E and E is normal over K, then F need
      (b) If F is generated                             by a (possibly infinite) set of separable elements over AT,                not be normal over K. [Hint: Let                            V   2 be a real fourth root of 2 and consider
      then F is a separable extension of K.
                                                                                                                                   Q(^2) ZD Q(V^) ZD Q; use Exercise 23.] Compare Exercise 2.
12.   Let E be an intermediate field.                                                                                     21   .   Let F be algebraic over K. F is normal over K if and only if for every A>monomor-
        (a) If u z F is separable over K, then u is separable over £.                                                               phism of fields a             :    F — TV, where TV is any normal extension of # containing F,
                                                                                                                                                                              *

        (b) If F is separable over K, then F is separable over E and £ is separable                                                 C7(F)      = Fso that
                                                                                                                                                        ^-automorphism of F. [Hint: Adapt the proof of Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                  o-   is a

      over K.                                                                                                                      rem 3.14, using Theorem 3.16.]

13.   Suppose [F                      :    X] is finite. Then the following conditions are equivalent:                    22. If F is algebraic over                      K and every element of F belongs to an intermediate field
               (i)  F is Galois over K\                                                                                            that is normal over K, then F is normal over K.
               (ii) F is separable over K and a splitting
                                                          field of a polynomial / e K[x];

              (in) F is a splitting field over X of a polynomial /e X[x] whose irreducible
                                                                                                                          23. If [F            :   K]   = 2, then F is normal over K.
      factors are separable.
                                                                                                                          24.      An algebraic extension F of K is normal over K if and only if for every irre-
                                                                                                                                   ducible fz K[x], /factors in F[x] as a product of irreducible factors all of which
14.   (Lagrange's Theorem on Natural Irrationalities). If L and         are intermediate            M                              have the same degree.
      fields such that L is a finite dimensional Galois extension of K, then     is finite                        LM
      dimensional and Galois over                                 M and Aut M ^M ^ Au\       L ^ M L.                     25.      Let F be a splitting field of fz K[x]. Without using Theorem 3.14 show that F is
                                                                                                                                   normal over K. [Hints: if an irreducible # z K[x] has a root u z F, but does not
15.   Let £ be an intermediate field.                                                                                              split in F,           then show that there is a /^-isomorphism                   <p   :   K(u)   = K(v), where
        (a) If F is algebraic Galois over AT, then F is algebraic Galois over E. [Exercises                                        v $F and c is a root of #. Show that <p extends to an isomorphism F = F(v).
      2.9 and 2.11                        show that the "algebraic" hypothesis is necessary.]                                      This contradicts the fact that \F K] < [F(c) K}.}       :              :




                                 E is Galois over K and F is a splitting field over £ of a
              (b) If F is Galois over F,
      family of polynomials in K[x], then F is Galois over K [see Exercise 2.12].


16.   Let F be an algebraic closure of the field                            Q of rational numbers and let E <Z Fbe
      a splitting field over  of the set S = {x 2       Q                    + a a z Q so that E is algebraic and
                                                                                  \
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                          4.       THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL
      Galois over Q (Theorem 3.11).                                                                                                The primary purpose of this section is to provide some applications and examples
         (a) E = Q(X) where X = {^p\p = - 1 or p is a prime integer                                       |
                                                                                                                          of the concepts introduced in the preceding sections. With two exceptions this ma-
         (b) If o-sAut E, then a = l E Therefore, the group Aut F is actually a
                                     2
                                                                        .
                                                                                                                          terial     is    not needed in the sequel. Definition 4.1 and Theorem 4.12, which depends
      vector space overZ2 [see Exercises 1.1.13 and IV. 1.1].                                                             only on Theorem 4.2, are used in Section 9, where we shall consider the solvability
         (c) Aut Q F is infinite and not denumerable. [Hin /.for each subsets of *
                                                                                   there
                                                                                                                          by radicals of a polynomial equation.
      exists o-eAut E such that a(^p) = -^p for ^pzY and a(^p) = ^p for
      ^pzX - Y. Therefore, |Aut Q F| = \P(X)\ > \X\ by Introduction, Theorem 8.5.
      But    =N                           .]

        (d) If B is a basis of Aut Q F over Z>, then B is infinite and not denumerable.
                                                                                                                          Definition 4.1. Let K be a field. The Galois group of a polynomial f z K[x] is the

                        Aut Q F has an infinite nondenumerable number of subgroups of index 2.                            group Aut K F, where F is a splitting field off over K.
              (e)

      [Hint: If b zB, then B                                — \b\ generates a subgroup of index 2.]
              (f)       The set of extension fields of Q contained in E of dimension 2 over Q is                             By virtue of Corollary 3.9, the Galois group of / is independent of the choice of F.
      denumerable.                                                                                                        Before giving any examples we first develop some useful facts. Recall that a subgroup
              (g)       The set of closed subgroups of index 2 in Aut Q F is denumerable.                                 G of the symmetric group S n is said to be transitive if given any ^ j (1 < ij < «),               /


              (h) [E       Q] <K whence [E Q] < |Aut Q F|.
                             :                      ,               :                                                     there exists a z G such that a(i)= j.
                              .




270                                   CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                           4.   THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL                                                             271



Theorem 4.2. Let K be a field and f e K[x] a polynomial with Galois group G.                                                                                               Proposition 4.5. Let K, f, F and A be as in Definition 4.4.

          (i)    G is isomorphic to a subgroup of some symmetric group S                                                                             n.                             The discriminant A 2 off actually lies in K.
                                                                                                                                                                                  (i)

          (ii)   Iff is (irreducible) separable of degree n, then n divides \G\ and                                                                       G is isomor-         (ii) For each a e ^w/rF < S„, a is an even [resp. odd] permutation if and only if

phic to a transitive subgroup ofS u                  ;
                                                                                                                                                                           (j(A) = A [resp. <t(A) = -A].



          SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) If u u                u n are the distinct roots of / in some
                                                                                 .       .   .
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. For (ii) see the proof of Theorem 1.6.7. Assuming (ii)
splitting field          F (1 < n < deg /), then Theorem 2.2 implies that every a £ Aui K F in-                                                                            note that for every a e Aut K F, a(A 2 ) = a(A) 2 = (d=A) 2 = A 2 Therefore, A 2 e K since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




duces a unique permutation of \u ...,«„} (but not necessarily vice versa!).
                                                                     x ,
                                                                                                                                                                           F is Galois over K (Theorem 3.1      1 ;   Exercise 3.13).
Consider S„ as the group of all permutations of \u\, u n and verify that the                                                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                             ,   )



assignment of a £ AvX K F to the permutation it induces defines a monomorphism
Aut*F-*S„. (Note that F = K(u u       u ).)                  .       .       .
                                                                                     ,           7l
                                                                                                                                                                           Corollary 4.6. Let K, f, F, A be as in Definition 4.4 (so that F is Galois over K) and
   (ii) Fis Galois over (Theorem 3.11) and [K(u )                                                                               K] = n = deg/(Theorem 1.6).
                                                                                                                        x   :
                                                                                                                                                                           consider     G = Aut^F as a subgroup ofS      n.   In the Galois correspondence (Theorem 2.5)
Therefore, G has a subgroup of index n by the Fundamental Theorem 2.5, whence                                                                                              the subfield K(A) corresponds to the subgroup              G   fl   A   n .   In particular,               G consists of
n \
    G\. For any /
      \
                                  ^
                   j there is a AT-isomorphism <r #(«0 K(uj) such that a(w ) = u                                    :                =                         T       }
                                                                                                                                                                           even permutations if and only if A e K.
(Corollary 1.9). a extends to a AT-automorphism of F by'Theorem 3.8, whence G is
isomorphic to a transitive subgroup of S n                                                           .


                                                                                                                                                                               PROOF. Exercise.
          Hereafter the Galois group of polynomial /will frequently be identified with the
isomorphic subgroup of S n and considered as a group of permutations of the roots
                                                                                                                                                                           Corollary 4.7. Let K be a field and f e K[x] an (irreducible) separable polynomial of
of /. Furthermore we shall deal primarily with polynomials fzK[x] all of whose roots
are distinct in some splitting field. This implies that the irreducible factors of /are
                                                                                                                                                                           degree 3. 77/^ Galois group offis either S 3 or A 3 // char.                  K ^ 2,      // is   A // and only if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                                                                                           the discriminant offis the square of an element ofK.
separable. Consequently by Theorem 3.11 (and Exercise 3.13) the splitting field F of
/is Galois over K. If the Galois groups of such polynomials can always be calculated,
then it is possible (in principle at least) to calculate the Galois group of an arbitrary                                                                                      PROOF. Exercise; use Theorem 4.2 and Corollary 4.6.
polynomial (Exercise 1).
                                                                                                                                                                               If the base field K is a subfield of the field of real numbers, then the discriminant
                                                                                                                                                                           of a cubic polynomial fe K[x] can be used to find out how many real roots /has
                                                                                                                                                                           (Exercise 2).
Corollary 4.3. Let K be a field and f e K[x] an irreducible polynomial of degree 2 with
Galois group G.Iffis separable (as is always the case when char                                                                                  K ^ 2), then G = Z   2;
                                                                                                                                                                              Let / be as in Corollary 4.7. If the Galois group of /is A 3                            ^Z there are, of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3

                                                                                                                                                                           course,   no intermediate fields. If it is 5 3 then there are four proper intermediate
otherwise          G=     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,



                                                                                                                                                                           fields, K(A), K(ui), K(u^), and K(u?) where Wi,w 2 ,w 3 are the roots of /. tf(A) corresponds

                                                                                                                                                                           to A z and K(u ) corresponds to the subgroup (\),(jk)\(i ^ j,k) of S>, which has order
                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \

      SKETCH OF PROOF. Note that S = Z                                                           2             2.       Use Remark (ii) after Definition                   2 and index 3 (Exercise 3).
3.10 and Theorem 4.2.                                                                                                                                                         Except in the case of characteristic 2, then, computing the Galois group of a
                                                                                                                                                                           separable cubic reduces to computing the discriminant and determining whether or
      Theorem 4.2 (ii) immediately yields the fact that the Galois group of a separable                                                                                    not it is a square in K. The following result is sometimes helpful.
polynomial of degree 3 is either S 3 or A s (the only transitive subgroups of S 3 ). In
order to get a somewhat sharper result, we introduce a more general consideration.

                                                                                                                                                                           Proposition 4.8. Let K be a field with char K ^ 2,3. //f(x) = x 3  bx 2  cx                       +                +      +
                                                                                                                                                                           d £ K[x] has three distinct roots in some splitting field, then the polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                           g(x)   = f(x — b/3) £ K[x] has the form x          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -f px   + q and the discriminant of f
Definition 4.4. Let                       K be a field with char K ^ 2 and f s K[x] a polynomial of                                                                                                                                                                                                   is
                                                                                                                                                                           -4p - 27q
                                                                                                                                                                                  3        2
degree n with n distinct roots u ]?                  .   .       .
                                                                         ,
                                                                                 u„ in some splitting field                                          Foff over K. Let                          .




A = YL ( u ~ u      i      i)
                                  = ( u ~ u )(U] — U:0-
                                           i    2
                                                                                         •           (u n _i    — u„) £ F; the discriminant of f is
                                                                                                                                                                              SKETCH OF PROOF. Let F be a splitting field of /over K and verify that
the element             D = A     2
                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                                    + b/3 is a root of g - /(a - b/3). This implies
                                                                                                                                                                           u e F is a root of /if and only if u
                                                                                                                                                                           that g has the same discriminant as /. Verify that g has the form a 3                      + px +            cj   (p,cj e K).
   Note that A is an element of a specific splitting field F and therefore, a priori,                                                                                      Let r,,£-..,r 3 be the roots of g in F. Then (x - v^x - u 2 )( x - r ) = g(x) = a 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;i                               + px + Q
D = A 2 is also in F. However, we have                                                                                                                                     which implies
272                      CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                   4.           THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL                                                                273


                                                    Vi + v + ^3 = 0;   2                                                                                                       Lemma 4.10. // K is afield and f = x + bx + cx + dx + e e K[x], then the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4           3                   2



                                                    V\V + V1V3 + V2V3 = p\
                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                — cx + (bd — 4e)x — b e + 4ce — d e K[x].
                                                                                                                                                                               resolvant cubic of f is the polynomial x 3                                     2                               2                        2


                                                    — V1V2V3 = q.
                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Let / have roots u u             « 4 in some splitting field F.    .   .   .   ,
Since each Vi is a root of g
                                                                                                                                                                               Then use the fact that f = ix - u )ix - u \x - u 3)ix - u 4 ) to express b,c,d,e in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x               2

                                                   = —pvi — q                           (i      = 1,2,3).                                                                      terms of the u Expand the resolvant cubic (x - a)(x — P)(x - 7) and make appro-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     {.


                                                                                                                                                                               priate substitutions, using the definition of a,P,y (Lemma 4.9) and the expressions
The fact that the discriminant A of g is -4p             2                          3
                                                                                        - 21q now follows from a gruesome
                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                                               for b,c,d,e obtained above.
computation involving the definition A 2 =         — v>) 2 (vi — v s ) 2 (v 2 — v3)                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                       ,   the equa-
tions above and the fact that (v { — vtf- = (v { + vj) — 4i^ y
                                                      2
                                                                                                                             .




                                                                                                                                                                                  We are now in a position to compute the Galois group of any (irreducible)
      EXAMPLE. The polynomial x - 3x +                                3
                                                                                            1   e Q[x]                is    irreducible by                      Theorem        separable quartic fe K[x}. Since its Galois group G is a transitive subgroup of 5 4
III. 6.6 and   Proposition III. 6.8 and separable since char                                                          Q = 0. The discriminant                             is
                                                                                                                                                                               whose order is divisible by 4 (Theorem 4.2), G must have order 24, 12, 8 or 4. Verify
— 4( — 3)3 _ 27(1) = 108 — 27 = 81 which is a square in Q. Hence the Galois group
                     2
                                                                                                                                                                               that the only transitive subgroups of orders 24, 12, and 4 are 5 4 A A                                                             Vi^Z @Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2     2                              ,           ,              )
is   Az by Corollary 4.7.                                                                                                                                                      and the various cyclic subgroups of order 4 generated by 4-cycles; see Exer-
                                                                                                                                                                               cise 1.4.5 and Theorem 1.6.8. One transitive subgroup of S 4 of order 8 is the
      EXAMPLE. If f{x) = x + 3x - x -          3
                                                QW, then          2
                                                                                    1   e                                                                                      dihedral group D 4 generated by (1234) and (24) (page 50). Since D 4 is not normal in
                                                                                                                                                                               5 4 and since every subgroup of order 8 is a Sylow 2-subgroup, it follows from the
                     g(x) = f(x - 3/3) = f(x - 1) = * - 4x + 2,                                               3                                                                  ,



                                                                                                                                                                               second and third Sylow Theorems that 5 4 has precisely three subgroups of order
which is irreducible by Eisenstein's Criterion (Theorem III.6.15). By Proposition 4.8                                                                                          8, each         isomorphic to Z> 4               .




the discriminant of / is -4(-4) 3 - 27(2) = 256 - 108 = 148, which is not a
                                              2


square in Q. Therefore the Galois group is S 3                                          .




   We turn now to polynomials of degree four (quartics) over a field K. As above,                                                                                              Proposition 4.11. Let K be a field and f e K[x] an (irreducible) separable quartic
we shall deal only with those feK[x] that have distinct roots u u u 2 ,u z ,u 4 in some                                                                                        with Galois group              G (considered as a subgroup ofS Let afi,y be the roots of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4 ).


splitting field F. Consequently,F is Galois over K and the Galois group of / may be                                                                                            resolvant cubic off and let            m = [K(a,(3,y) K]. Then:            :




considered as a group of permutations of u u u ,u^u and a subgroup of S The sub-
                                                                           j            2           4 \                                                    4.
                                                                                                                                                                                        m = 6<=>G = S
                                                                                                                                                                                      (i)                                           4 ;
set V = {(l),(12)(34),(13)(24),(14)(23)j is a normal subgroup of S (Exercise 1.6.7),                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                        m = 3 <=> G = A
                                                                                                                                                                                     (ii)                                            4 ;
which will play an important role in the discussion. Note that V is isomorphic to the
                                                                                                                                                                                        m =
                                                                                                                                                                                     (iii)        G = V;
four group Z    2   ©Z
                     and V D G is a normal subgroup of G = Aut K F < S
                         2                                                                                                                                      4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                                                   (iv) m = 2<=>G^D orG^Z ;w this case G ^ D iff is irreducible over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4            4                                       4

                                                                                                                                                                               K(c*,/3,7) and G ^ Z otherwise.     4




Lemma 4.9. Let K,                f,   F, u i5 V, and      G = Aur K F < S be as in the preceding para-        4


graph. If a = UiU>           +    u 3 u4   ,
                                               jS   = U1U3 + U2U4, 7 = Uiu + u u e F, then under the              4              2       3
                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Since K(a,0,y) is a splitting field over of a cubic, the                                               K
Galois correspondence {Theorem 2.5) the subfieldK(afi,y) corresponds to the normal                                                                                             only possibilities for m are 1,2,3, and 6. In view of this and the discussion preceding
subgroup V (1 G. Hence K(a P y) is Galois over K and AutyJ£(a,&,y)
                                               f    f
                                                                                                                                                 = G/(G D V).                  the theorem, it suffices to prove only the implications <= in each case.                                                            We use the
                                                                                                                                                                               fact that        m = [K(a,(3,y)              :       K] = \G/G D V\ by Lemma 4.9.
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Clearly every element in G D V fixes a,P,y and hence                                                                                                          If      G = A    G D V = V and m = \G/V\ = \G\/\V\ - 3. Similarly, if
                                                                                                                                                                                                     A,   then
K(a,/3,y). In order to complete the proof it suffices, in view of the Fundamental                                                                                              G =5       4,   then m = 6. If G = V, then G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V = G and m = \G/G\ = 1. If G ^ D                                                                  4,

Theorem, to show that every element of G not in V moves at least one of a,/3,y. For                                                                                            thenG D V = V since V is contained in every Sylow 2-subgroup of S and m = \G/V\                                            4

instance if a = (12) e           G
                          and ai(3) = (3, then u 2 u z -f Wiw 4 = um u 2 u 4 and hence                                                       +                                 = \G\/\V\ = 2. If G is cyclic of order 4, then G is generated by a 4-cycle whose
u 2 im — u A ) = Uiiuz — « 4 ). Consequently,                                  U\   = u         2   or u 3 = w 4                     ,   either of         which     is   a    square must be in V so that G (1 V\ = 2andw - \G/G (1 V\ = \G\/\G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |              V\ = 2.
contradiction. Therefore               The other possibilities are handled similarly.
                                           ai(3)                 (3.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Since /is either irreducible or reducible and       4     4                  D ^Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 it suffices to prove the con-        ,



[Hint: Rather than check all 20 possibilities show that it suffices to consider only one                                                                                       verse of the last statement. Let u u u 2 ,u 2 ,u 4 be the roots of / in some splitting field F

representative from each coset of V in 5 4 ].                                                                                                                                  and suppose G              ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                    D 4 so that G D V = V. Since V is a transitive subgroup and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,



                                                                                                                                                                               G fl V = Aut A( « .a,7)^ (Lemma 4.9), there exists for each pair / =^ y (1 < ij < 4)
      Let K, f F, Ui and a,(3,y be as in Lemma 4.9. The elements a,(3,y play a crucial                                                                                         a a e G (1 K which induces an isomorphism K(a,P,y)(ui)       K(a,(3,y)( Uj ) such that                     =
role    in   determining the Galois groups of arbitrary                The polynomial                                      quartics.                                           a(ud = Uj and a K(a,P,y) is the identity. Consequently for each / ^ j, u and w, are
                                                                                                                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   {


(jc - a)ix — j3)(x - 7) s K(a,j3,y)[x] is called the resolvant cubic off. The resolvant                                                                                        roots of the same irreducible polynomial over K(a,P,y) by Corollary 1.9. It follows
cubic is actually a polynomial over K:                                                                                                                                         that / is irreducible over K(a,(3,y). On the other hand if         4  then G fl V =                        G^Z         ,
                                                                                                                                                                       ;




274                                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                    4.        THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL                                     275



AutK{a.p.y)F has order 2                                  and is not transitive. Hence for some / ^ j there is no                                                              Determining the intermediate fields and corresponding subgroups of the Galois
a e G   fl      V such that a(ui) = uj. But since F is a splitting field over K(afi,y)(u ) and                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                           group of a separable quartic is more complicated than doing the same for a separable
K(afi,y)(Uj), if there were an isomorphism K(a,ff,yXud       K(a yXkj), which was                                  =        9       9
                                                                                                                                                                           cubic. Among other things one may have K(ui) = K(uj) even though « ^ w (see the              t       3



the identity                                       would be the restriction of some
                         on K(a,(3,y) and sent u, to w„                                               it                                                                   last example above). There is no easily stated proposition to cover the quartic case

a s Aut/v- (a .0.7)^ = G fl F by Theorem 3.8. Therefore, no such isomorphism exists,                                                                                       and each situation must be attacked on an ad hoc basis.
whence u and u cannot be roots of the same irreducible polynomial over K(a /3,y)
                {             }
                                                                                                                                                                  9




by Corollary 1.9. Consequently, / must be reducible over K(afi,y).                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. Let F C C be a splitting field over Q of /= x - 2 e Q[x]. If u is           4


                                                                                                                                                                           the positive real fourth root of 2, then the roots of / are u,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —u, ui, —ui. In order to
    EXAMPLE. The polynomial /= x + 4x + 2 £ QM is irreducible by Eisen-                   4           2                                                                    consider the Galois group G = AutQF of /as a subgroup of 5 4 we must choose an      ,




stein's Criterion (Theorem III. 6. 15); /is separable since charQ = 0. Using Lemma                                                                                         ordering of the roots, say U\ — u, u 2 = —u,u 3 = ui, « 4 = —ui. We know from the
4.10 the resolvant cubic is found to be x — 4x — 8x           32 = (x — 4)(x — 8) so          3            2                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                           third example after Proposition 4.11 that G is one of the three subgroups of order 8

that a = 4,     = \^8, 7 = —"^8 and Q(a,0, 7 ) - Q(V 8 ) = Q( 2 V2) = Q(V^) is of
                         |S                                                                                                                                                in Si, each of which is isomorphic to the dihedral group A. Observe that complex

dimension 2 over Q. Hence the Galois group is (isomorphic to) A orZ A substitu-                                                                  4.                        conjugation is an R-automorphism of C which clearly sends «|— u, — «|— > —u,
tion z =     reduces / to z
                -v
                     2
                             4z + 2 whose roots are easily seen to be z = — 2 ± \/2
                                                      2
                                                          -|-                                                                                                              ui\-> —ui and —«/(—> ui. Thus it induces a Q-automorphism t of F = Q(u,ui). As

thus the roots of / are x =                                      ±^z - =b V-2 ± V^- Hence                                                                                  an element of 5 4 r = (34). Now every subgroup of order 8 in S 4 is conjugate to
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                           (Second Sylow Theorem) and an easy calculation shows that the only one containing
  /= (x - V-2 + V2)U + V-2 4- V2X-v ~ V-2 - V2)U + V-2- V2)                                                                                                                (34) is the subgroup D generated by a = (1324) and r = (34). It is easy to see that

            = (x - (-2 + V2) (* - (- 2 - V2)) ^ Q(V2)W-
                                                2                                         2                                                                                F = Q(u,ui) = Q(u,i), so that every Q-automorphism of F is completely determined
                                                                                                                                                                           by its action on u and Thus the elements of D may be described either in terms of a
                                                                                                                                                                                                          /.


Therefore, / is reducible over Q(V2) and hence the Galois group is cyclic of order                                                                                         and t or by their action on u and /. This information is summarized in the table:
4 by Proposition 4.11 (iv).

                                                                                                                                                                                            (0       (34)       (1324)   (12)(34)    (1423)    (13)(24)   (12)         (14)(23)
    EXAMPLE. To find the Galois group of / = x - \0x + 4 £ Q[x] we first                                       4        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      r           a         a2        a3         (TT      <7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T     a3r
verify that /is irreducible (and hence separable as well). Now /has no roots in Q, and
                                                                                                                                                                                             u         u          ui       —u         — ui       ui       —u           — ui
thus no linear or cubic factors, by Theorem III. 6. 6 and Proposition III. 6. 8. To check
                                                                                                                                                                                   i^                —                                          —         —             —
for quadratic factors it suffices by Lemma III.6.13 to show that /has no quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                                             i            /        i             i         i        i      i                /



factors in Z[x].                      It       is   easy to verify that there are no integers a,b,c,d such that
/= (x + ax + b)(x + +
        2                                      2
                                                      cx    d). Thus /is irreducible inQ[x]. The resolvant cubic                                                              It is left   to the reader to verify that the subgroup lattice of                D and the lattice of
of /is x + l&v - \6x - 160 -
            3                 2
                                 + 10)(x + 4)(* - 4), all of whose roots are in
                                                                        (a-                                                                                                intermediate fields are as given below, with fields and subgroups in the same relative

Q. Therefore, m = [Q(a,0,7) Q] =   and the Galois group of /    V (^ Z @Z         1                                                     is                2           2)
                                                                                                                                                                           position corresponding to one another in the Galois correspondence.

by Proposition 4.11.                                                                                                                                                          Subgroup lattice (H —> K means H < K):

   EXAMPLE. The polynomial x - 2 z Q[x] is irreducible (and separable) by     4


                                        is x + 8x = x(x + 2^2i)(x — 2V2/)
                                                                                                           3
Eisenstein's Criterion. The resolvant cubic
and Q(of,jS,7) = Q(^2i) has dimension 2 over Q. Verify that x - 2 is irre-                                                                   4



ducible over Q(V20 (since V2,          ^                                V2
                                         Q(^2i)). Therefore the Galois group                                                                                          is

isomorphic to the dihedral group D 4 by Proposition 4.11.

   EXAMPLE. Consider/- x - 5x + 6 £ Q[x]. Observe that /is reducible over
                                                                    4                 2



Q, namely / = (x -2)(x - 3). Thus Proposition 4.11 is not applicable here.
                                           2              2


Clearly F = Q(\/2,V3) is a splitting field of / over Q and since x - 3 is irreducible
                                                                                                                                1



over Q(V2), [F                    :    Q] = [FQJ = 2-2 = 4. Therefore Aut F, the
                                                           :
                                                                Q(V2)] [Q(V 2 )                   :




Galois group of / has order 4 by the Fundamental Theorem.        It follows from the

proof of Theorem 4.2 and  Corollary  4.3 that  Aut Q Q(V2) consists of two elements:
the identity map 1 and a map a with <r(yj2) = - yj2. By Corollary 1.9, 1 and a each
extend to a Q-automorphism of F in two different ways (depending on whether
y]3 H> V3  orV3 h> -  V^)-This gives four distinct elements of Auto/7 (determined by
the four possible combinations: V2         2 and V 3|_^                       H ±V
                                                           3 )- Since |Auto^| = 4                                  ±V
and each of these automorphisms has order 2 the Galois group of / must be isomor-
phic to the four group Z 2   2 by Exercise 1.4.5.         ®Z                                                                                                               Intermediate field lattice (M —>              N means M CZ N):
276                                           CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                              4.           THE GALOIS GROUP OF A POLYNOMIAL                                                                            277



                                                                               F = Q(uJ)                                                                              (a) F is a splitting field of g over E.
                                                                                                                                                                      (b) F is Galois over E.
                                                                                                                                                                      (c) Aui E F = Aut K F.


                                                                                                                                                            2.   Suppose K is a subfield of R (so that F may be taken to be a subfield of C) and
                                                                                                                                                                 that /is irreducible of degree 3. Let                                      D be the discriminant of / Then
                                                                                                                                                                      (a) D>             if and only if /has three real roots.
                                                                                                                                                                      (b) D <            if and only if /has precisely one real root.


                                                                                                                                                            3.   Let / be a separable cubic with Galois group S 3 and roots u u u 2 ,uz z F. Then the
                                                             Q(" 2 )             Q(0           Q(" 2
                                                                                                                                                                 distinct intermediate fields of the extension of                                      K by F are F, K(A), K(ui), K(u                                  2 ),

                                                                                                                                                                 AT(w 3), K. The corresponding subgroups of the                                        Galois group are 1,^ 3                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tu T T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2,     z

                                                                                                                                                                 and 5 3 where T =            {            j
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (l),(yX)   \   j   ^ ^ k\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i




                                                                                  Q                                                                         4. If char       K ^ 2,3 then the discriminant of x + bx + cx + d is —4c — 27 d +      z        2                                          3           2


                                                                                                                                                                 ^(c 2 - 4bd) + 18£crf.
          Specific techniques for computing Galois groups of polynomials of degree greater
                                                                                                                                                            5.   If char     K ^ 2 and / e AT[*] is a cubic whose discriminant is a square in                                                                    then /
than 4 over arbitrary fields are rather scarce. We shall be content with a very special
                                                                                                                                                                 is   either irreducible or factors completely in K.
case.

                                                                                                                                                            6.   Over any base field K, x 3 — 3x + 1 is either irreducible or splits over K.

Theorem 4.12. // p is prime and f is an irreducible polynomial of degree p over the                                                                         7.   5 has no transitive subgroup of order 6.
                                                                                                                                                                  4



field of rational numbers which has precisely two nonreal roots in the field of complex
                                                                                                                                                            8.   Let j be an (irreducible) separable quartic over K and u a root of /. There is no
numbers, then the Galois group off is (isomorphic to) S p                                              .

                                                                                                                                                                 field properly between                          K and K(u) if and only if the Galois group of /is either
                                                                                                                                                                 A A or 5    4.
    SKETCH OF PROOF. Let G be the Galois group of / considered as a sub-
group of S p Since p\\G\ (Theorem 4.2), G contains an element a of order p by
                            .                                                                                                                               9.   Let .v 4 -f ax 2       +6             £           (with char              # ^ 2) be irreducible with Galois group G.
Cauchy's Theorem II. 5.2. a is a /?-cycle by Corollary 1.6.4. Now complex conjuga-                                                                                    (a)   If b is a square in                    K, then G = V.
tion (a + bi\-> a — bi) is an R-automorphism of C that moves every nonreal ele-                                                                                       (b) If 6 is not a square in                        # and b(a — Ab) is a square in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     then      G ^Z     4.

ment. Therefore, by Theorem 2.2 it interchanges the two nonreal roots of /and fixes                                                                                   (c)   If neither b nor 6(a 2                     — 46) is a square in  then G = Z)                                    4.


all the others. This implies that G contains a transposition r = (ab). Since a can be
                                                                                                                                                           10.   Determine the Galois groups of the following polynomials over the                                                                               fields
written a = {aj r       some power of a is of the form a k = (abir i p ) s G. By
                                          •
                                              -j P ),                                                                      •   -


                                                                                                                                                                 indicated:
changing notation, if necessary, we may assume r = (12) and a = (123-
                                                                k
                                                                          p). But                                                      •


                                                                                                                                                                      (a)   x A - 5 over Q; over 0(^5); over Q(^5i).
these two elements generate S v by Exercise 1.6.4. Therefore G = S p                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                                      (b) (x 3- 2)(x - 3)(x - 5)(x - 7) over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                2               2


                                                                                                                                                                      (c)    - x - over Q; over 0(^23/).
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

          EXAMPLE. An inspection of the graph of / = x - 4x + 2 e Q[x] shows that                 b

                                                                                                                                                                      (d)    - 10 over Q; over 0(^2).
      has only three real roots. The polynomial / is irreducible by Eisenstein's Criterion
                                                                                                                                                                      (e) x + 3jc + 3x - 2 over Q.
it                                                                                                                                                                           4           3

(Theorem III. 6. 15) and its Galois group is S b by Theorem 4.12.                                                                                                     (f)    - 6x + 3 over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                      (g) x — 2 over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                             3


          It is still an open question as to whether or not there exists for every finite group
                                                                                                                                                                      (h) (x - 2)(x - 5) over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                 3                2


G a Galois extension field of Q with Galois group G. If G = S n however, the answer                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                      (i) x - 4x + 5 over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                             4           2


is    affirmative (Exercise 14).                                                                                                                                            *4       + 2x + x + 3 over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                      (j)

                                                                                                                                                           11.   Determine all the subgroups of the Galois group and all of the intermediate
                                                                          EXERCISES                                                                              fields     of the splitting field (overQ) of the polynomial (x 3 - 2)(x 2                                                             — 3)eQ[*].
          Note: Unless stated otherwise K is a field, fz K[x] and F is a splitting field of/                                                               12.   Let K be a subfield of the real numbers and fz K[x] an irreducible quartic. If /
over K.                                                                                                                                                          has exactly two real roots, the Galois group of /is S 4 or D 4                                                 .




                                                                                                       - u ) nk (u distinct; m > 1).                             Assume that f(x) z K[x] has distinct roots u u u 2                                                         u n in the splitting field F
     1.   Suppose fz K[x] splits in Fas / = (x - u{) ni                                    -    -(x        k       {
                                                                                                                                                           13.                                                                                          ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,




          Let v Q   ,   .   .   .
                                    ,   v k be the coefficients of the polynomial g = (x - w,)(* - u 2 )                       .   .   .   (x   - uk   )
                                                                                                                                                                 and let G = Aut A F < S n be the Galois group of / Let >i,                                                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   y n be indeter-
          and let E = K(v                        ,   .   .   .   v k ). Then                                                                                     minates and define:
278                           CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.       FINITE FIELDS                             279


                                      = II ( X ~ (^(1)^1 + «a(2)>>2 H                                                  h Hainan))                                                                 We begin with two theorems and a lemma that apply to fields which need not be
                                              <TtSn
                                                                                                                                                                                      finite.        In each case, of course, we are interested primarily in the implications for
         (a)     Show that                                                                                                                                                            finite fields.


                         g( X )       = II ( X ~ ("1^(1) + «2>V(2) H                                                   h «n^a(n))).

                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 5.1. Let ¥ be a field and let P be the intersection ofall subfields ofF. Then P
         (b)     Show that                                K[y u                   >> n ,x].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p (prime), then P = Z p // char F = 0,
                                                      £
                                                                                                                                                                                      is a field with no proper subfields. If char F =
                                                                  .   .   .
                                                                              ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .

                 Suppose g(x) factors as gi(x)# 2 (x)-                                            -g r (x) with                        g (x) £
         (c)                                                                                  •
                                                                                                                                               t              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                          ,y n )[x]
                                                                                                                                                                                      then P          = Q, the field of rational numbers.
       monic irreducible. If x — ]T) u^yi is a factor of gi(x), then show that
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The field P is called the prime subfield of F.
                                                           gM = II (* - 2 tw«)-
                                                                                                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.1. Note that every subfield of F must contain
       Show that this implies that deg g (x) = \G\.                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                      and \ F It follows readily that P is a field that has no proper subfields. Clearly P con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .



         (d) If      K = Q, /£ Z[x]                         is   monic, and /? is a prime, let feZp [x] be the poly-                                                                  tains all elements of the form m\ F (m z Z). To complete the proof one may either
       nomial obtained from / by reducing the coefficients of /(mod p). Assume /has                                                                                                   show directly that P = {m\ F \mzZ\ ifcharF = pandP = \(m\ F )(n\ F )- m,neZ,                                       1


                                                                                                                               Zp Show that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \



       distinct roots u\,             .   .   .   ,   u n in some splitting field F over                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                      n j± Oj if char F =     or one may argue as follows. By Theorem III. 1.9 the map
                                                                                                                                                                                      <p :Z-^>P given by m\->m\ F is a ring homomorphism with kernel («), where
                                                      =11^-2 fi/^o)                               «                    >   •   •   •       >       ^1-
                                                                                                                                                                                      n = char F and n =      or n is prime. If n = p (prime), thenZp        Z/(p) = Z/Ker <p                   ^
       If the «, are suitably ordered, then prove that the Galois group                                                                                  G of / is a sub-             =   Im (p CZ P. Since Zv is a field and P has no proper subfields, we must have
       group of the Galois group G of /
                                                                                                                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                                                                                                      Zp Im <p = P. If n = 0, then <p Z —> P is a monomorphism and by Corollary        :



                                                                                                                                                                                      III.4.6 there is a monomorphism of fields ^ Q — P. As before, we must have
         (e) Show    that x 6 + 22x 5 - 9x 4 + 12x 3 - 37x 2 - 29x - 15 £ Q[*]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :
                                                                                                                                                                              has
       Galois group 5 6 [7/z/z/: apply (d) with /? = 2, 3, 5.]
                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                      Q ^ Im             7p       = P.
         (f) The Galois group of x — x — 1 £ Q[x] is S 5
                                      b
                                                                                                                   .




14.    Here is a method for constructing a polynomial / £ Q[x] with Galois group S n for                                                                                              Corollary 5.2.          7/F is a finite field, then char F = p ^                                         for some prime p and
       a given /i > 3. It depends on the fact that there exist irreducible polynomials of                                                                                             |F|         = P n for some integer n > 1.
       every degree inZp [*] (/; prime; Corollary 5.9 below). First choose /,/,/ £ Z*M
       such that:
                                                                                                                                                                                         PROOF. Theorem III. 1.9 and Theorem 5.1 imply that F has prime character-
               (i)   deg f = n and / zZ2 [x] is irreducible (notation as in 13(d)).                                                                                                       p ^ 0. Since F is a finite dimensional vector space over its prime subfield
                                                                                                                                                                                      istic

           (ii)      deg f2 = n and f2 sZ3 [x] factors in Zs [x] as gh with  an irreducible of                                                                                        Zp F^ZP @- ®ZP (n summands) by Theorem IV.2.4 and hence \F\ = pn
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




       degree n —     and h linear;
                         1


          (iii) deg /3 = n and fztZb [x] factors as gh or gh\h 2 withg- an irreducible                                                                                                        In the sequel the prime subfield of a field F of characteristic p will always be
       quadratic in Zb [x] and hjhjh irreducible polynomials of odd degree in Zb [x].                                                                                                 identified with        Zv under the isomorphism of Theorem 5.1. For example, we shall
                                                                                                                                                                                      write         Zp CZ F; in particular, F coincides with zZp              \                        1   .


         (a) /= -15/ + 10/ + 6/. Then f=f (mod 2),
                 Let                                                                                          x                                          / (mod 3), and
       /-/(mod 5).
         (b)    The Galois group G of /is transitive (since /is irreducible in Z2 [x]).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 5.3. 7/F is afield and is a finite subgroup of the multiplicative group of
         (c)     G contains a cycle of the type f = (z'l/o M _i) and element crX where a is a
                                                                                                  •   •   •
                                                                                                              z'
                                                                                                                                                                                      nonzero elements of F, then                                             G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is a cyclic group. In particular, the multiplicative group
       transposition and X a product of cycles of odd order. Therefore a z G, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                      of all nonzero elements of a finite field is cyclic.
       (/*/"„) £ G for some k(\ < k < n — 1) by Exercise 1.6.3 and transitivity.

           (d) G = S n (see part (c) and Exercise 1.6.4(b)).
                                                                                                                                                                                         PROOF. If G(^l)isafinite abelian group, G^Znl @Zn2 @- -@Zmk where
                                                                                                                                                                                      Wi > 1 and nn     m        m k by Theorem II. 2.1. Since m k (£ Zmi ) = 0, it follows that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |       2   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |




                                                                                                                                                                                      every u z G is a root of the polynomial x mk - F e F[x] (G is a multiplicative group).       l

                                                                                                                                                                                      Since this polynomial has at most m k distinct roots in F (Theorem III. 6.7), we must
5.    FINITE FIELDS                                                                                                                                                                   have k =     and G ^ Z™ 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




      In this section finite fields (sometimes called Galois fields) are characterized in
terms of splitting fields and their structure completely determined. The Galois group
of an extension of a finite field by a finite field is shown to be cyclic and its generator                                                                                           Corollary 5.4. 7/F is a finite field, then F is a simple extension of its prime subfield
is   given explicitly.                                                                                                                                                                Zp      ;   that is, F        = Z p (u) for some u £ F.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^                -_
280                                       CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                          5.   FINITE FIELDS                            "       ^        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ^
         SKETCH OF PROOF. Let m be a generator of the multiplicative group of                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Given K of order p let F be a splitting field of         r



nonzero elements of F.                                                                                                                   /= x
                                                                                                                                                prn
                                                                                                                                                    — x over K. By Proposition 5.6 every u e K satisfies u pr = u and follows in-               it
                                                                                                                                                                 pTn
                                                                                                                                         ductively that u    = u for all u s K. Therefore, F is actually a splitting field of / over
                                                                                                                                         Zp (Exercise 3.3). The proof of Proposition 5.6 shows that F consists of precisely the
                                                                                                                                                                                         [F K] =
                                                                                                                                         p distinct roots of / Thus p = \F\ = \K\
                                                                                                                                                                                                       lF:K
                                                                                                                                                                                                            \ whence [F K] = n.
                                                                                                                                          nr                              nr                                   '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (p )                                                   :



 Lemma 5.5. IfF is a field of characteristic p and r > 1 is an integer, then the map                                                     Corollary 5.4 implies that F is a simple extension of K. If F\ is another extension field
                                                                                                                                         of K with [Fi :K] = n, then [Fi :ZP = n[K:Zp = nr, whence                       = p nr By
   F —> F given by u |—> u pr is a Z p -monomorphism of fields. If F is finite, then <p is a
                                                                                                                                                                                             ]                           ]                                    .

<p   :

                                                                                                                                         Proposition 5.6 F\ is a splitting field of x
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pUr
                                                                                                                                                                                                       — x over Zp and hence over K. Conse-
Zp-automorphism ofF.
                                                                                                                                         quently, F and F\ are AT-isomorphic by Corollary 3.9.

                                                                                                                                    pT
         SKETCH OF PROOF. The key fact is that for characteristic p, (u                                                  =fc   v)

 = u     pT
              ±v   pT
                            for all u,v e F (Exercise III. 1.11). Since \ F \-> \ F                  ,   v fixes each element in         Corollary 5.9.          7/K is a finite field and n >             1        an integer, then there exists an irre-
the prime subfield                       Zp of F.                                                                                        ducible polynomial of degree n in K[x].



         We can now give a useful characterization of finite fields.                                                                           PROOF. Exercise; use Corollary 5.8 and Theorem 1.6.


                                                                                                                                         Proposition 5.10. If F is a finite dimensional extension field of a finite field K, then F
Proposition 5.6. Let p be a prime and n > 1 an integer. Then F is a finite field with                                                           and is Galois over K. The Galois group AutKF is cyclic.
                                                                                                                                         is finite
                                                      pn
p elements if and only if F is a splitting field of x
 n                                                       — x over Z p                                          .




                                                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF. Let Zp be the prime subfield of K. Then F is finite di-
                                                                                                                                         mensional over Z p (Theorem 1.2), say of dimension n, which implies that \F\ = p n
     PROOF. Ifl/ = p n then the multiplicative group of nonzero elements of F has
                                 7
                                     !         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




order p n —      and hence every nonzero u e F satisfies u
                        1
                                                             pn ~
                                                                    = 1/ Thus every nonzero  l
                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                         By the proof of Proposition 5.6 and Exercise 3.2 F is a splitting field over Zp and
w £ F is a root of x
                      pn ~
                            —     and therefore a root of A'C^
                                           l
                                                   1 y-
                                                                  "
                                                                     — 1/.) = x — x eZp [x]
                                                                                        71
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                   pTX                   hence over K, of x
                                                                                                                                                             pU
                                                                                                                                                                — x, all of whose roots are distinct. Theorem 3.11 implies that
as well. Since     e F is also a root of x  — x, x — jc has p n distinct roots in F (that is,
                                                          J,n       p7X                                                                  F is Galois over K. The map <p F —> F given by u H> u p is a Zp -automorphism by
                                                                                                                                                                                  :




it splits over F by Theorem III. 6. 7) and these roots are precisely the elements of F.
                                                                                                                                         Lemma 5.5. Clearly <p n is the identity and no lower power k of v can be the identity
Therefore, F is a splitting field of x      — x over Zp   J,n
                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                         (for this would imply that x
                                                                                                                                                                       pk
                                                                                                                                                                          — x had p n distinct roots in F with k < n, contradict-
                                        pn
                                           — x over Zp then since char T7 = charZp = /?,                                                 ing Theorem III. 6. 7). Since lAutzpfl = n by the Fundamental Theorem, Aut Zp F
     If F is a splitting field of / = x                                       ,



/' = — and /is relatively prime to /'. Therefore /has /? distinct roots in F by Theo-  ri                                                must be the cyclic group generated by <p. Since AutA-F is a subgroup of Aut Zp F,
              1



rem III.6.10(ii). If v? is the monomorphism of Lemma 5.5 (with r = n), it is easy to                                                     Aui K F is cyclic by Theorem 1.3.5.
see that u e F is a root of /if and only if <p(w) = u. Use this fact to verify that the set E
of all roots of /in F is a subfield of F of order /? n which necessarily contains the prime
                                                                          ,



subfield Z p of F. Since F is a splitting field, it is generated over Z v by the roots of /
                                                                                                                                                                                      EXERCISES
(that is, the elements of E). Therefore, F = Z^Zs) = E.                                                                                        Note:    F always denotes an extension field of a field K.
                                                                                                                                          1.   If    K is a finite field of characteristic p, describe the structure of the additive
                                                                                                                                               group of K.
Corollary 5.7. // p /s a /?r/>?7<? and n > \ an integer, then there exists a field with p n
                                                                                                                                          2.   (Fermat) If p e Z is prime, then a p = a for all a eZ p or equivalently, c p = c
elements.Any two finite fields with the same number of elements are isomorphic.
                                                                                                                                               (mod p) for all c e Z.

         PROOF. Given p and n, a splitting field F of x» — x overZ,, exists by Theorem
                                                                                  71                                                      3.   If \K\   = p n then every element of K has a unique /?th root in K.
                                                                                                                                                             ,




                                          n                                                                               n
3.2      and has order p by Proposition 5.6. Since every finite field of order p is a                                                     4. If the roots of a         monic polynomial / £ K[x] (in some splitting field of / over K)
                    pU
splitting field of x   - x over Zp by Proposition 5.6, any two such are isomorphic by                                                          are distinct and form a field, then char     K = p and / = x pTl — x for some n > 1.
Corollary 3.9.
                                                                                                                                          5.   (a)    Construct a field with 9 elements and give its addition and multiplication
                                                                                                                                               tables.
                                                                                                                                               (b)    Do the same for a field of 25 elements.
Corollary 5.8.   IfK is a finite field and n > is an integer, then there exists a simple
                                                                1
                                                                                                                                          6.   U\K\ = q and (n,q) = 1 and F is a splitting field of x n — \ K over K, then [F K)
extension field F = K(u) ofK such that F is finite and [F K] = n. Any two n-dimen-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :

                                                                                       :


                                                                                                                                               is   the least positive integer k such that n                (q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        — 1).
sional extension fields ofK are K-isomorphic.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       \
282                                  CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                   6.        SEPARABILITY                                                                              283



 7. If \K\           = q and feK[x] is irreducible, then / divides x* n — x if and only if deg /                                   If char                K = 0, then every algebraic element over K is separable over K. There-
      divides n.                                                                                                               fore, Theorem 6.2 implies that the only elements that are purely inseparable over                                                                                  K
                                                                                                                               are the elements of                  K itself. Thus purely inseparable extensions of K are trivial if
 8. If \K\           = p and \F\ = p n then r
                              r
                                                    ,               \
                                                                        n and Aut^F is cyclic with generator <p given by       char    K
                                                                                                                                       = 0. Consequently, we usually restrict our attention to the case of nonzero
                     pr
      u |—> u             -
                                                                                                                               (prime) characteristic. We shall frequently use the following fact about characteristic

 9.   If n   > 3, then              jc
                                      2"
                                           + ;c +          1   is reducible over   Z2   .
                                                                                                                               p without explicit mention: if char K = p^O and u,v e K, then (u ± v) pn = u pU ± v pU
                                                                                                                               for all n            >       (Exercise III. 1.11). In order to characterize purely inseparable exten-
10.   Every element in a finite field may be written as the sum of two squares.                                                sions we need:

11.   Let F be an algebraic closure of Z v (p prime).
        (a) F is algebraic Galois over Zp                                  .




           (b)       The map <p            :   F — F given by u H> u p is a nonidentity Zp -automorphism
                                                   >                                                                           Lemma 6.3. Let F be an extension field ofK with char K = p ^ 0. // u e F is
                                                                                                                                                   pn
      of F.                                                                                                                                           is separable over K for some n > 0.
                                                                                                                               algebraic over K, then u
           (c)       The subgroup H = (<p) is a proper subgroup of Autz p F whose fixed field
      is   Zp which is also the fixed field of Auiz p F by (a).
                 ,                                                                                                                 SKETCH OF PROOF. Use induction on the degree of u over K. If deg u = 1
                                                                                                                               or u is separable, the lemma is true. If /is the irreducible polynomial of a nonsepar-
12. If K is finite and F is an algebraic closure of K, then AuUF is abelian. Every ele-
                                                                                                                               able u of degree greater than one, then f'                                         =           (Theorem III. 6.10), whence /is a poly-
    ment of A ut K F (except F ) has infinite order.   \
                                                                                                                               nomial in xp (Exercise III. 6.3). Therefore, u^ is algebraic of degree less than deg u
                                                                                                                                                                                          p7T
                                                                                                                               over K, whence by induction (u p )                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                    is   separable over                          K for some m > 0.

6.    SEPARABILITY
      Our study of separability will be greatly facilitated by the simultaneous con-                                           Theorem 6.4. //F is an algebraic extension field of a field K ofcharacteristic p^0,
sideration of a concept that is, in a sense, the complete opposite of separability.                                            then the following statements are equivalent:

Consequently the section begins with purely inseparable extensions, which are char-                                                  (i)       F is purely inseparable over K;
acterized in several different ways in Theorem 6.4. These ideas are then used to prove                                                                                                                                                                             — a e K[x];
                                                                                                                                   (ii)        the irreducible polynomial of any u e F is of the form x pn
all the important facts about separability of algebraic extensions (principally Theo-
                                                                                                                                  (iii)        /'/       u e F, then u
                                                                                                                                                                         pn
                                                                                                                                                                              e   K for some n > 0;
rem 6.7). The degree of (in)separability of an algebraic extension is discussed in                                                 (iv)        the only elements ofF which are separable over                                                    K are the elements ofK itself
detail (most of this material, however, is not needed in the sequel). Finally the                                                    (v)       F is generated over K by a set of purely inseparable elements.
Primitive Element Theorem is proved (Proposition 6.15). This result is independent
of the rest of the section and may be read at any time.
                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.4. (i) =^> (ii) Let (x - u) m be the irreducible poly-
                                                                                                                               nomial of u e F and let m = np r with (n,p) = 1 Then (x — u) m = (x — u) prn                                 .




                                                                                                                               = (x pr - u pr ) n by Exercise III. .1 1 Since (x - u) m e K[x], the coefficient of x pr{n ~ \
                                                                                                                                                                                      1    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l


Definition 6.1. Let F be an extension field oj K. An algebraic element u e F is purely
                                                                                                                               namely ±nu pr (Theorem III. 1.6), must lie in K. Now (p,n) = 1 implies that u pT e K
inseparable over                  K ifits irreducible polynomial f in K[x] factors in F[x] as f = (x — u) m                .

                                                                                                                               (Exercise 1). Since (x — u) m = (x
                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                                                                                                                                                                           — u pT) n is irreducible in K[x], we must have
F is a purely inseparable extension ofK if every element ofF is purely inseparable                                                               —     m = x — a, where a = u pT e K.
                                                                                                                                                            pr
                                                                                                                               n = 1 and (x         u)
over K.
                                                                                                                                   The implications                  (ii) =^> (iii)       and            (i) =^ (v)                   are       trivial,   (iii) => (i)     by Exercise
                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 6.2; and (iv) => (iii) by Lemma 6.3. (v) =^> (iii) If u is
                                                                                                                               III. 1.11; (i) =^> (iv) by
   Thus                      K if its irreducible polynomial / of degree n has n distinct
                 u is separable over
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e K for some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pTl
                                                                                                                               purely inseparable over AT, then the proof of (i) =^> (ii) shows that u
roots (in some splitting field) and purely inseparable over K if /has precisely one
                                                                                                                               n > 0. If u £ F is arbitrary use Theorem 1.3 and Exercise III. 1 .11.
root. It is possible to have an element that is neither separable nor purely inseparable
over K.

                                                                                                                               Corollary 6.5. IfF is a finite dimensional purely inseparable extension field of K and
Theorem 6.2. Let F be an extension field ofK. Then u e F is both separable and                                                 char K          = p ^ 0, then [F K] = p n for some n > 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                  :




purely inseparable over                        K if and only if u e K.
                                                                                                                                   PROOF. By Theorem 1.11 F = K(u u                                                   .   .   .   u m ). By hypothesis each u { is purely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,



      PROOF. The element u e F is separable and purely inseparable over K if and                                               inseparable over AT and hence over K(u u                                       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              « t-_i) as well (Exercise 2). Theorems 1 .6
only if its irreducible polynomial is of the form (x — u) m and has m distinct roots in                                        and     6.4          (ii)     imply that every step                       in       the tower                     K d K(u]) d K(u u u ) CZ     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
some splitting field. Clearly this occurs only when aw = 1 so that x — u e K[x]                                                K(u u   .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                         u m ) - F has dimension a power of p. Therefore [F                                                    :   K] = p n by Theo-
and u e K.                                                                                                                     rem 1.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         w




284                               CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.                   SEPARABILITY                                                                                                                          285



        One more preliminary is needed for the principal theorem on separability.                                                                          and 3.14 and Exercise 3.2). Since F is Galois over P, P = SP by (v), which implies
                                                                                                                                                           that 6 is a monomorphism. Hence AutpP          Aut A S. Finally suppose u z S is fixed by                                                                                                ^
                                                                                                                                                           all o- z Aut A S. Since 6 is an epimorphism, u is in the fixed field P of AutpP, whence

Lemma S.blfFisan extension field o/K, X is a subset ofF such that F = K(X),                                                                                u z P        fl               5 = A". Therefore, 5 is Galois over A.
and every element ofX is separable over K, then F is a separable extension ofK.
                                                                                                                                                           Corollary 6.8. If F is a separable extension field of E and E is a separable extension
        PROOF. If oeF, then there exist u u                                 .   .   .
                                                                                        ,   un z     X such that v z K(u u ...,*/„) by                     field of K, thenF is separable over K.
Theorem 1.3. Let fiz K[x] be the irreducible separable polynomial of u and E a                                                             {



splitting field of f     ,/„) over{
                                            «„). Then £ is also a splitting field of
                                                                    .       .   .
                                                                                    ,                                                                            PROOF. If S is as in Theorem 6.7, then E CZ S and P is purely inseparable over
| fu     ,fn over X (Exercise 3.3). By Theorem 3.11 E is separable (in fact Galois)
         .    .    .      \                                                                                                                                S. But P is separable over  E and hence over S (Exercise 3.12). Therefore, P = S by
over K, which implies that v z K(u u                .   .   .
                                                                ,       un )            dE          is   separable over                                    Theorem 6.2.

                                                                                                                                                              Let P be a field of characteristic p ^ 0. Lemma 5.5 shows that for each n > 1 the                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,




Theorem 6.7. Le/ F 6e an algebraic extension field of   S the set of all elements ofF                    K    ;
                                                                                                                                                           setFp " =       w £ P} is a subfield of P. By Theorem 6.4 (iii), P is purely inseparable
                                                                                                                                                                                                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,/7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1




which are separable over K, and P the set of all elements of F which are purely in-                                                                        over F and hence over any intermediate field as well (Exercise 2).
                                                                                                                                                                            l,n



separable over K.

             (i)       S is a separable extension field ofK.                                                                                               Corollary 6.9. Let F be an algebraic extension field of K, with char K = p^0. IfF
        (ii)           F is purely inseparable over S.                                                                                                     is separable overK, then F = KF pn /or ^c/z n >     // [F K] is finite and F = KF P                                                                                                                                       1       .    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,




        (iii)          P is a purely inseparable extension field ofK.                                                                                      then F is separable over K. In particular, u s F is separable over K // and only if

        av) p n S = K.                                                                                                                                     K(up) = K(u).
        F is separable over P // and only if F = SP.
         (v)
        IfFis normal over K, then S is Galois over K, F is Galois over P and Aut K $
        (vi)                                                                                                                                         =           SKETCH OF PROOF. Let S be as in Theorem 6.7. If [P                                                                                                                                                                                               :   K] is finite, then
Autj>F = Aut K F.                                                                                                                                          P = K(u u                           by Theorem 1.11. Since each u is purely in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     •       •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wm )   = S(u u                  .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,       w,„)                                                                                                                  {

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pn
                                                                                                                                                           separable over S (Theorem 6.7), there is an n > 1 such that u    z S for every /. Since                                                                                                                                                        z

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pn
        REMARKS. It is clear that S is the unique largest subfield of F separable over K                                                                   F = S{u               Exercise III. 1.11 and Theorem 1 .3 imply that F C S. Clearly
                                                                                                                                                                                     x       ,           .


                                                                                                                                                                                                            pTl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,




and that S contains every intermediate field that is separable over K\ similarly for P                                                                     every element of S is purely inseparable over F      and hence over KF    S is separ-                                                                                                                                         ,                                           .




and purely inseparable intermediate fields. If char K = 0, then S = F and P = K                                                                            able over K, and hence over                                                                                           KFpn Therefore S = KFpn by Theorem 6.2. Use the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




(Theorem 6.2).                                                                                                                                             fact     that                             char                   K = p and Theorem 1.3 to show that for any > 1, Fpt =                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pt    pt                                                                                                       pt
                                                                                                                                                           [K(Ui,            .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,       um    = K (Ui p \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )] um    Consequently for any f> we have             .       .        .           ,                        ).                                                                                   1


   SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.7. (i) If w, reSand^ 0, then K(u,v) is separable                                                                                   KFpt = K{K p \u/,                                                                        .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )           = K(u/,                                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w m p ').    Note         that      this                 argument

over K by Lemma 6.6, which implies that u — v, uv~ zS. Therefore, 5 is a subfield.                       l
                                                                                                                                                           works             for                             any generators u l9                                                                  .        .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   u m of                                   F over K. Now if P = KFP                                                 ,       then
                                                                                                                                                           ^(ii,,       .        .           .               ,u J = P = #P" =                                                                             #(«,",                            .               .       .               An iterated argument with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    «/).
Lemma 6.3 and Theorem 6.4 imply (ii). (iii) is a routine exercise using Exercise                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,




                                                                                                                                                           generators                                                                    in place of u { [t                        = 1,2,                                                                                   n] shows that P = K(u          um) =
III. 1.11 if char K = p and the fact that P = K if char K = 0. Theorem 6.2 implies (iv).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .        .           .                                                                ,   .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,                                                   x                        ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pTl
                                                                                                                                                           Kiuf",                                                                        w m p ") = KF                            = 5, whence P is separable over K. Conversely, if
    (v) If F is separable over P, then F is separable over the composite field SP (Exer-
                                                                                                                                                                                     .           .               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,




cise 3.12) and purely inseparable over SP((ii) and Exercise 2). Therefore, F = SP by
                                                                                                                                                           F is separable over K, then P is both separable and purely inseparable over KFpH
                                                                                                                                                                                               pn
                                                                                                                                                           (for any n > 1). Therefore P = #P      by Theorem 6.2.
Theorem 6.2. Conversely, if F = SP = P(S), then F is separable over P by Exercise
3.12 and Lemma 6.6.
        (vi)           We show first that the fixed field K of AuX K F is in fact P, which immediately                                                         Next we consider separability and inseparability from a somewhat different point
                                                                                                                                                           of view. Although Proposition 6.12 is used at one point in Section 7, all that is really
implies that F is Galois over P and Aui P F = Aut A P. Let u z F have irreducible poly-
                                                                                                                                                           essential for understanding the sequel is Definition 6.10 and the subsequent remarks.
nomial / over K and let a z Aut A P; a(u) is a root of / (Theorem 2.2). If u z P, then
/= (x - u) m and hence a(u) = u. Therefore, P CZ K                                                       .   If u z   K and   i?   s Pis       any other
root of /, then there is a /^-isomorphism r                             :       #(«)        —   >             such that t(w) =        i;   (Corollary      Definition 6.10. Let F be an algebraic extension field of K andS the largest subfield
     By Theorems 3.8 and 3.14 and Exercise 3.2 r extends to a ^-automorphism of P.
1 .9).                                                                                                                                                     of F separable over K (as in Theorem 6.7). The dimension [S KJ is called the separable                                                                                                                                                     :




Since u z K we have u = t(w) = u. Since / splits in P[x] by normality, this argument
                              ,                                                                                                                            degree of F over K and is denoted [F K] s The dimension [F S] is called the in-                                                                                         :                            .                                             :



shows that f = (x — u) m for some m. Therefore, uzP and P ZD K Hence P = K».                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                           separable degree (or degree of inseparability) of F over K and is denoted [F K]i.                                                                                                                                                                                                             :



   Every c £ Aut P P = Aut A P must send separable elements to separable elements
(Theorem 2.2). Therefore, the assignment ffhff \S defines a homomorphism                                                                                         REMARKS. [P                                                                    :       K\ s = [F                     :       K] and [P             K), - 1 if and only if P is separable over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :



6 AutpF— Aut A 5. Since P is normal over 5,       is an epimorphism (Theorems 3.8
    :                         >
                                                                                                                                                           K. [F    :       K] s                     =                   1           and [P                 :   K],     = [F                      :       K] if and only if p is purely inseparable over K. In
                                                 CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6.    SEPARABILITY                                                                                                               287
286


                                                                                                                                                                     K] is finite and char K                            Since v is a root of / (as in Theorem 2.2) there are at most [F                                                                                                                                              K] = deg / such
any case, [F K] = [F                                                     K]> by Theorem 1.2. If [F                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                           :                          :   K] a [F    :                                                                                           :




= p j± 0, then [F                               : K]< is a power of p by Corollary 6.5 and Theorem 6.7(ii). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        K-monomorphisms. Since / splits in N by normality and is separable, Corollary 1 .9
following lemma will enable us to give an alternate description of [F                                                                                                            :   K] a and to                        shows that there are exactly [F K] distinct K-monomorphisms F —> N.                             :




show that for any intermediate field E, [F E] a [E K] 8 = [F K] a                                    :                   :                                           :   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Corollary 6.13. If F is an extension field ofE and E is an extension field ofK, then

Lemma 6.11. Let F be an extension field of E, E an extension field ofK and N a                                                                                                                                                                            [F           :   E].[E                   :       K] 8 = [F        :   KJ.           and              [F       :   EJJE               :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kfc      = [F             :       K]i.

normal extension field of K                                     containing F.Ifv is the cardinal number ofdistinct E-mono-
                                                                            —
morphisms F — > N and t is the cardinal number of distinct K-monomorphisms E > N,                                                                                                                                             PROOF. Exercise; use Lemma 6.11 and Proposition 6.12.
then rt is the cardinal number of distinct K-monomorphisms   F — > N.


      PROOF. For convenience we assume that r,                                                                               t       are finite. The same proof will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Corollary 6.14. Let f e K[x] be an irreducible monic polynomial over a field K, F a
work in the general case with only slight modifications of notation. Let n,          r be                                                                                             .       .   .    ,   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    splitting field off over                                                       K and Ui a root offin F. Then
all the distinct F-monomorphisms F
                                           —> N and <r u       a all the distinct K-mono-                                        .       .       .   ,       t




morphisms £-> N. Each <n extends to a ^-automorphism of N (Theorems 3.8 and                                                                                                                                                    (i)   every root off has multiplicity [K(u0                                                                                 :   K] so that in F[x],
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t




3.14 and Exercise 3.2) which will also be denoted o\. Each composite map o\r, is a                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f   = [( X - Ul )          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (x   - u„)P^ :K1                                 ',

K-monomorphism F -> N. If ^r, = o- a r then o-«- o-<r,- = rt which implies that
                                                                                                                                             l
                                                                                             fc ,


     -l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            = [K(u0 KJ
<T a    <Ti   |
               E = l E Consequently, we have <n = a a and / = a. Since a is injective
                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    where u u                .    .       .    ,   u n are all the distinct roots off and n                                                                                                  :           8;


              OVT6 implies that r, = rt and j = 6. Therefore, the rt
<nTj     =                                                             K-monomorphisms                                                                                                                                        (ii)   m lK(Ul) Kli is separable over K.
aT
 .    .
          . /r _» ^(i < / <
                              /, 1 <j<r) are all distinct. Let (7 F —> Af be any K-mono-                                                                         :




morphism. Then c E = <n for some / and <n" a is a K-monomorphism F-* N,                                                                                                                                                       SKETCH OF PROOF. Assume char K = p *                                                                                                                                                                          K=
                                                                                                                     l
                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    since the case char                                                   is

which is the identity on F. Therefore, ar a = ry for somey, whence a = o- r Thus
                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                                                          t       y.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    trivial, (i) For any /                               K(w0 = K(u ) with a(u ) = Ui
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >           1   there is a K-isomorphism a                                              :                                     t                     }



the rr distinct maps ^r, are all of the K-monomorphisms F -> N.                                                                                                                                                     that extends to a K-isomorphism a of F (Corollary 1.9, Theorem 3.8, and Exercise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.2). Since fe K[x] we have by Theorem 2.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (x - tt^n.                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (   x - w n y- = f= <jf= ( x - (7(«i)) n                                                            -    •        - vMY*.
Proposition 6.12. Ler F fo? a                                          N a normal    dimensional extension field ofK and
extension field ofK containing F. The number of distinct K-monomorphisms F
                                                                           — N                                                                                                                         >       is   Since wi,            .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,    u n are distinct and a is injective, unique factorization in K[x] implies

precisely [F           :       K] 8     ,       ///e separable           degree ofF over K.                                                                                                                         that (x          — u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   = (x — a(u )Y\ whence r = r,. This shows that every root of /has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x                              Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    multiplicity r= r so that /= (x — u0    -(x — w„) and [K(w0x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K] = deg / = nr.                                       r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :




   SKETCH OF PROOF. Let S be the maximal subfield of F separable over K                                                                                                                                             Now Corollary 1.9 and Theorem 2.2 imply that there are n distinct K-monomor-
(Theorem 6.7(i)). Every K-monomorphism S ->    N
                                            extends to a K-automorphism of                                                                                                                                          phisms K(u\) — F, whence [K(w0 K], = n by Proposition 6.12 and Theorem 3.14.                            :




N (Theorems 3.8 and 3.14 and Exercise 3.2) and hence (by restriction) to a K-mono-                                                                                                                                  Therefore,

morphism F -> N. We claim that the number of distinct K-monomorphisms F -> N                                                                                                                                                                                               [K( Wl )                        K],     = [K( Ul )         KJ/[K( Wl )                           KJ.        = nr/n = r.
      same as the number of distinct K-monomorphisms S — N. This is trivially true
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :                          :                                 :



is the

        K = since F = S in that case. So let char K = p                                                                                                                                                                                                                    power of /? = char K, we have f = (x — w ) r     (jc — w n )   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r
if char                                                   and suppose a, r are                                                                                                                                      (ii)      Since r                 is           a                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •




                                                                 n
K-monomorphisms F -> N such that o- S = r 5. If « e F, then u*> s 5 for some             |                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (jr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              — U\ ) r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (x   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           — w„ ). Thus / is a polynomial in x with coefficients in K, say
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r                                                                                           r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n                                                                                                                                              ti

n >               by Theorems 6.4 and 6.7(ii). Therefore,
                                                                         =          n
                                                                                             = r(«^ ) = r(w)*>   n                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /=               Ui*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -       Consequently, u{ is a root of g(x)                                                                —           ^ x =      a   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (x — u r )-              Y      (x — u n r )
                                                           a( u )v«          (r( W p )                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    £   K[xJ. Since u u                                    .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,   un              are distinct,              ^(jc) e K[x]                        is       separable.                        Therefore                 wi       -=


whence (K«) = r(w). Thus o- 5 = r 5 implies a = r, which proves our claim. Con-
                                                                 |               |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u \k «o A-h              j   s        separable over K.
sequently, it suffices to assume that F is separable over K (that is, F = 5), in
                                                                                   which
case we have [F K]     =  [F K] s [F E]
                                    :
                                        =   [F E] s and [£ K]
                                                            :
                                                              =  [E  ,
                                                                      K] a for
                                                                             :
                                                                               any  inter-               :                                               :                   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The following result is independent of the preceding material and is not needed
mediate field                  E (Exercise 3.12).                                                                                                                                                                   in the sequel.
     Proceed now by induction on n = [F K] = [F K] s with the case ai = 1 being                  :                                   :




trivial. If n > 1 choose w e F - K; then [K(w)   K] = r > 1. If r < n use the induction                      :




hypothesis and     Lemma   6.11 (with E = K(u))   to prove the theorem. If r = n then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposition 6.15. (Primitive Element Theorem) Let F be a finite dimensional ex-
F = K{u) and [F K] is the degree of the (separable) irreducible polynomial / 8 K[x]
                                            :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tension field ofK.
of u. Every K-monomorphism a F —>             is completely determined by v = o(u).
                                                                             :           N
                               .                                            .




288                                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                            7.           CYCLIC EXTENSIONS                                                      289


       (i)     IfF is separable over K, then F is a simple extension ofK.                                                                                  10.    Let char K = p ^                       and let fz K[x] be irreducible of degree n. Let w be the
               (Artin) More generally, F is a simple extension ofKifand only if there are only                                                                    largest nonnegative integer such that / is a polynomial in x^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m
       (ii)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     but is not a poly-
                                                                                                                                                                                       m+1
finitely many intermediate fields.                                                                                                                                nomial in xr               .       Then n = n pm If u is a root of /, then [K(u) #] s = n and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                      :



                                                                                                                                                                  [*(«) K] t = p
                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




       REMARK. An element u such that F — K(u) is said to be primitive.                                                                                    11. If /e                 is irreducible of degree                         m > 0, and char # does not divide w, then /is
                                                                                                                                                                  separable.
       SKETCH OF PROOF OF 6.15. The first paragraph of the proof of Lemma
3.17, which is valid even if the field                                 K is finite, shows that a separable extension has                                   12.    F is purely inseparable over K if and only if F is algebraic over K and for any ex-
only finitely many intermediate fields. Thus it suffices to prove (ii). Since (ii) clearly                                                                        tension field E of F, the only tf-monomorphism F — * F is the inclusion map.
holds if K is finite (Corollary 5.8), we assume that K is infinite. One implication of (ii)
                                                                                                                                                           13. (a)      The following conditions on a field K are equivalent:
is proved in the second paragraph of the proof of Lemma 3.17. Conversely assume
F = K(u) with u algebraic over K (since [F K] is finite). Let E be an intermediate:                                                                                      (i)    every irreducible polynomial in K[x] is separable;
                                                                                           ~
field and g e E[x] the irreducible monic polynomial of u over E. If g = x
                                                                             n
                                                                                 a n -\X n                                                +            l
                                                                                                                                                                        (ii)    every algebraic closure                    K of K is Galois over K\
       -\-aix -f- a then [F E] = n. Show that E = K(a ,ai,
                                   ,                  :               tfn-i) by verifying                     .    .   .   ,                                            (iii)   every algebraic extension field of                   K is separable over K;
that [F K(a Q   :     a n ~\)] = n. Thus every intermediate field E is uniquely deter-
                      ,    .   .       .
                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                        (iv) either       char          K=            or char K = p and # = K?.
mined by the irreducible monic polynomial g of u over E. If /is the monic irreducible
polynomial of u over K, then g f by Theorem 1.6. Since / factors uniquely in any
                                                                                                                                                                  A field # that satisfies (i)-(iv) is said to be perfect,
                                                                \



                                                                                                                                                                  (b)   Every finite field is perfect.
splitting field (Corollary III. 6. 4), / can have only a finite number of distinct monic
divisors. Consequently, there are only a finite                                         number of intermediate fields.                                     14. If   F = K(u,v) with u,v algebraic over K and u separable over K, then F is a simple
                                                                                                                                                                 extension of K.

                                                                                                                                                           15.   Let char K = p ^     and assume F = K(u,v) where u p eK,v p zK and [F       = /? 2
                                                                    EXERCISES                                                                                    Then F is not a simple extension of K. Exhibit an infinite number of intermediate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :    .




       Note: Unless stated otherwise F is always an extension field of a field K.                                                                                fields.


 1 .   Let char K = p ^                             and let n > 1 be an integer such that (p,n) =                                 1   .   If v z   F and   16.   Let F be an algebraic extension of K such that every polynomial in K[x) has a
        nv z K, then v z K.                                                                                                                                      root in F. Then F is an algebraic closure of K. [Hint: Theorems 3.14 and 6.7 and
                                                                                                                                                                 Proposition 6.15 may be helpful.]
 2.         F is purely inseparable over K, then u is purely inseparable over any inter-
       If u z
       mediate field E. Hence if F is purely inseparable over K, then F is purely in-
       separable over E.

 3.    If     F is purely inseparable over an intermediate field E and E is purely inseparable                                                             7.    CYCLIC EXTENSIONS
       over K, then F is purely inseparable over K.
                                                                                                                                                              The basic idea in Sections 7-9 is to analyze Galois field extensions whose Galois
 4.    If u z F       is            K and v z F is purely inseparable over K, then
                               separable over                                                                                                              groups have a prescribed structure (for example, cyclic or solvable). In this section
        K(u,c) = K(u + c). If u ^ 0, v ^ 0, then A'(//,r) - K(ia                                              ).
                                                                                                                                                           we shall characterize most finite dimensional Galois extensions with cyclic Galois
                                                                                                                                                           groups (Propositions 7.7 and 7.8; Theorem 7.11). In order to do this it is first
 5.    If char       K =           /;          ^    and a s          but a \ K>\ then x' "       1
                                                                                                         ~ a z K[x] is irreducible for                     necessary to develop some information about the trace and norm.
       every n >           1




 6.    If/e Afc] is monic irreducible, deg/ > 2, and /has all its roots equal (in a splitting
       field),      then char K = /? ^                              and / = a^
                                                                                 71
                                                                                      — a for some n >                     1   and # £ K.                  Definition 7.1. Let F be a finite dimensional extension field of                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and Kan algebraic
                                                                                                                                                           closure ofK containing F. Let ar u                         .   .   .       T r be all the distinct K-monomorphisms F -* K.
       Let F, K, 5, F be as in Theorem 6.7 and suppose E is an intermediate field. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
 7.
                                                                                                                                                           Ifu £ F, the norm of u, denoted, N K F (u) is the element
              (a) F is purely inseparable over E if and only if S C E.
              (b) IfF is separable over F, then P C F.                                                                                                                                                 N K F (u) = ((ri(uWu)-                  •   -<7 r (u)) lF:KJ '.

              (c) If F fl 5 = K, then F C P.
                                                                                                                                                           The trace o/u, denoted T K F (u), is the element
 8.    If char      K=p                            and [F       K] is finite and not divisible by /?, then F is separable
                                                                                                                                                                                        T K F (u) = [F KLMu) +
                                                            :




       over K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :                          <t 2 (u)   +   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +   <r r (u)).




 9.    Let char                = p ^ 0. Then an algebraic element                           //       z   F is separable over X if and                            REMARKS. Theorem 7.3 below shows that the definition does not depend on
       only if K(u) = K(u^) for all n >                                 1                                                                                  the choice of K. It can be shown that an equivalent definition is obtained if one re-
290                               CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                7.           CYCLIC EXTENSIONS                                                                                                 291


places K by any normal extension of K containing F (Exercise 1). J? is normal over K                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) and (ii) follow directly from Definition 7.1 and the
(Theorems 3.4 and 3.14), whence r = [F K] s is finite by Proposition 6.12. If the con-
                                                                :                                                                                         facts that r                   K] [F K] = [Fj K].
                                                                                                                                                                                           = [F                 :   K], and [F                          :            3           :           4


              K and TK will sometimes be written simply as N and T.
text is clear
               F         FN                                                                                                                                         (iii)         Let E = K(u).
                                                                                                                                                                                  An algebraic closure K of K which contains F is also an
                                                                                                                                                          algebraic closure of E. The proof of Lemma 6.11 shows that the distinct #-mono-
          Note that the trace is essentially the additive analogue of the norm. In many in-                                                               morpliisms                       F— K are precisely the maps Tj (1 < k < t;l <j< r), where the
                                                                                                                                                                                                       »                                                                                         <r k                                                                              (r's

stances this means that a proof involving the one will translate directly into a proof                                                                    are all the A'-automorphisms of                    K whose restrictions to E are distinct and the r's are
of the analogous fact for the other. There are some exceptions, however. For                                                                              all       the distinct F-monomorphisms F-+K. Thus by Proposition 6.12, / = [E : K] tf
instance if F is not separable over K, then char  = p ^ and [F K] { = p (/ > 1).    K                                             :
                                                                                                                                      l

                                                                                                                                                          whence n = [E                            :       K] = t[E                       :    K]   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (see Remarks after Definition 6.10).
Consequently, T F (u) =      for every ue F, but
                              K
                                                  F
                                                 K (u) may not be zero.             N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S

                                                                                                                                                                    Use (ii) and Corollary 6.13 to show that                                                                                                NK F(u) = (j{ a (u) lF E]lE K]i and      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              j
          EXAMPLE. Let F = C and K = R and take K = C. It is easy to see that the
only R-monomorphisms C — » C are the identity and complex conjugation. Conse-                                                                             TK F (u) = [F                      :   E][E                   :   K]i(j^ a k (u)y Since a                                                     t    K(u)         ^ K(ai(u)) Corollary 1.9 im-
quently N(a  bi) = [(a bi)(a - hi)] 1 = a 2
                          +                   +
                                              b\                                +                                                                         plies that <ti(w),                                .       .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <r t (u)          are all the distinct roots of /.                                                         By Corollary 6.14

          The principal applications to be given here of the norm and trace occur when F is
Galois over K. In this case the Galois group is finite and there is a more convenient
description of the norm and trace, which is sometimes taken as a definition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - (e ^(w))^'- +••+((-!)' ri ^(«))                            1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ]

                                                                                                                                                          If [E       :    A]      t    = 1, then n = / and the conclusion is immediate. If [E                                                                                                                    :   K]i   > 1, then
                                                                                                                                                          [E        K]            is a     positive power of p =' char                                                                            It is easy to calculate a                                   and to see that
                                                                    Galois extension field ofK and
                                                                                                                                                                :
Theorem 7.2.                  IfF   is a finite dimensional
                                                                                                                                                                          t


                                                                                                                                                          a n -i =                     = TK F(u); use Exercise III. 1.11.
                                                      AutjsF = {(7i,        .   .   .
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                            cr n ),                                                                 (iv)          Use the notation in the first paragraph of the proof of (iii), with E any inter-
then for any u s F,                                                                                                                                       mediate field. Apply the appropriate definitions and use Corollary 6.13.
                                     N K F (u) = (7i(u)(72(u)       •   •
                                                                                o-n(u);                         and
                                                                                                                                                                    In addition to the trace and norm we shall need
                                     T K F (u) = (7i(u) + a (u) +   2
                                                                                            •           •
                                                                                                            + *n(u).
   PROOF. Let K be an algebraic closure of K which contains F. Since F is normal
over # (Corollary 3.15), the A^-monomorphisms   > A^are precisely the elements of       F—                                                                Definition 7.4. Let S be a nonempty set of automorphisms of a field F. S is linearly
AutA-F by Theorem 3.14. Since F is also separable over K (Corollary 3.15),                                                                                independent provided that for any ai,                                                                          .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,   a n e F anda\,                .    .   .   ,   <r n   e S (n     > 1):
[F        K]i =           The conclusion of the theorem now follows directly from Defini-
      :             1 .
                                                                                                                                                                                   ai<ri(u)            +                             h a„(7n(u) =                                for all u e F                        =»            aj      =       for every i.
tion 7.1.


    Suppose F is Galois over K and Aut K F = <r u          a n Since Aut K F is a group,
                                                                                {               .   .       .
                                                                                                                ,     }
                                                                                                                          .




the elements <7,-<7i, <t,-<72,<w n (for any fixed a s A\\X K F) are simply audi,
                                      .   .   .                                       an                                                  .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                          Lemma 7.5. IfS is a set of distinct automorphisms of a field F, then S is linearly
                                                  ,

                                                                                 F
in a possibly different order. This implies that for any u s F, NK (u) and TK (u) are
                                                                     F                                                                                    independent.

fixed by every <n e Aut^F. Therefore,
                                            F            F    N
                                          K (u) and TK (u) must lie in K. The next
theorem shows that this is true even if F is not Galois over K. The first two parts will                                                                        PROOF. If S is not linearly independent then there exist nonzero a» e F and
be used frequently; the last two parts are not needed in the sequel.
                                                                                                                                                          distinct                     s   S such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                   a\ai(u)                      + ai<Ti{u) H                                         f-      a n a n (u) =                     for all              uzF.                          (1)


Theorem 7.3. Let F be a finite dimensional extension field ofK. Then for all u,v s F:                                                                     Among all such "dependence relations" choose one with n minimal; clearly n > 1.
                                                                                                                                                          Since a and   are distinct, there exists veF with o-i(y) ^
                                                                                                                                                                              x             (r 2                     (v). Applying (1) to the                                                                                            <r 2

           (i)    N k f (u)Nk f (v) = N K F (uv) and Tk f (u) + T K F (v) = T K F (u + v);                                                                element uv (for any weF) yields:
                  ifu s K, then N K (u) = u [F:K] and T K (u) = [F K]u;
          (ii)
                                       F                     F                                                      :




          (iii)   N K F (u) and T K F (u) are elements ofK. More precisely,                                                                                                                        aiai(u)ai(v)                                + a2a (u)(T2(v) H 2                                            h an <Tn (u)a n (v) = 0;                                            (2)

                                                                                                                                                          and multiplying (1) by <ri(i?) gives:
                  N K F (u) = ((-l) n a [F:K(u)] s K and T K F (u) = -[F K(u)]a„_i e K,
                                                  )                                                                           :




where f = x n -f a n -i x n_1 H   h a e K[x] is the irreducible polynomial ofu;
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ax<Tx(u)<r x (v)                        + a <TM<Ti(v) H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                                                 h a n <r n (u)<Ti(v) = 0.                                           (3)

   (iv) ifE is an intermediate field, then                                                                                                                The difference of (2) and (3) is a relation:
                          N K E (N E F (u)) = N K F (u) and T k e(Te ¥ (u)) = T K F (u).                                                                   a 2 [(T2 (v) - (Tiiv)]^) ^ a 3 [a3 (v) - ^(v)]^) -\-                                                                                               •   •   •    + a„[<7„(y) - <7i(i>)K(w) -
292                                  CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7.          CYCLIC EXTENSIONS                                                                                                           293



for all u e F. Since a 2                  ^             and a 2 (v) 5* a^v) not all the coefficients are zero and this                                                                                              Conversely suppose N(u) =                                                1   K which implies u 9^ 0. By Lemma 7.5 there exists
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,



contradicts the minimality of n.                                                                                                                                                                                    v e F such that the element v given by

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               = uy + (uau)ay + (uaua 2u)a 2y +                                                                                                                             ~   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v                                                                                                                •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -f ("o""      •   •   •   a n 2 u)a n 2y
   An extension field F of a field K is said to be cyclic [resp. abelian] if F is algebraic                                                                                                                                                                                              0- n_1 w)(7     n_
and Galois over K and Aut K F is a cyclic [resp. abelian] group. If in this situation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -f («0"«         •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~l
Aut K F is a finite cyclic group of order n, then F is said to be a cyclic extension of                                                                                                                             is nonzero.            Since the last summand of i> is N(u)a n                                                                                          y = lxo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              71-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ^ = o- n "V, it is easy to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
degree n (and [F K] = n by the Fundamental Theorem 2.5). For example, Theorem
                                :                                                                                                                                                                                   verify that                      = or, whence w = ^(i?)                                                                            (o-(i?)              5^   since                       and a is injec-
5.10 states that every finite dimensional extension of a finite field is a cyclic extension.                                                                                                                        tive).

The next theorem is the crucial link between cyclic extensions and the norm and trace.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We now have at hand all the necessary equipment for an analysis of cyclic ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tensions. We begin by reducing the problem to simpler form.
Theorem 7.6. Let ¥ be a cyclic extension field ofKof degree n, a a generator of
Aut^F and u e F. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposition 7.7. Let ¥ be a cyclic extension field ofK of degree n and suppose
      (i)    T K F (u) =            = v — a(v) for some v eF
                                     ifand only if u                                                                                                             ';
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n = mp* where ^ p = char K and (m,p) = 1. Then there is a chain of intermediate
                                                                         -1
      (ii) (Hilbert's Theorem 90) N K (u) = Ik if and only if u = vo-(v)
                                     F                                      for some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fields       F D E D Ei D                    •       •       •       D E _i DE = K such that F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t                        t                                                              is       a cyclic extension ofE
nonzero v e F.                                                                                                                                                                                                      of degree          m and for each < <                                    i           t,                               is a cyclic extension                                   ofE of degree p.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {




   SKETCH OF PROOF. For convenience write a(x) = ax. Since a generates                                                                                                                                                    SKETCH OF PROOF. By hypothesis F is Galois over K and Aut*F is cyclic
Aut^F, it has order n and a,a 2 a*,   a n ~\a n = l F = <r° are n distinct automor-
                                                                   y
                                                                             .       .   .
                                                                                              ,                                                                                                                     (abelian) so that every subgroup is normal. Recall that every subgroup and quotient
                                                                   n~            =
phisms of F. By Theorem 7.2, T(u)   =  u + au + a 2 u -{       h a    u and                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    group of a cyclic group is cyclic (Theorem 1.3.5). Consequently, the Fundamental
                                n_1 w).
«((TW) (<T U)-
              2      •   '((7                                                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 2.5(ii) implies that for any intermediate field E, F is cyclic over E and E is
      (i)    If u   = v — av, then use the definition and the facts that                                                                                                                                            cyclic over K. It follows that for any pair                                                                                L,M of intermediate fields with L C M,
                                     T(v — av) = T(v) — T(av)                                                                  and          a (v) = v
                                                                                                                                                n                                                                   M     is a       cyclic extension of L; in particular,                                                                         M       is algebraic                   Galois over L.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Let //be the unique (cyclic) subgroup of order m of Aut^F (Exercise 1.3.6) and
to    show that            T(u) = 0. Conversely suppose T(u) = 0.                                                                                            Choose w e F such that                                 let   E be its fixed field (so that H = H" = E = Aut^F). Then F is cyclic over E of                                            '



T(w) =        U as follows. By Lemma 7.5 (since K                                                                         \          7* 0) there exists                                   zeF such that             degree m and E is cyclic over K of degree p                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   Since AxxXkEq is cyclic of order p                                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           it   has a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    chain of subgroups
                                              ^     \   FZ   +     (TZ   +               (7
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                  Z H                         h (J^Z = F(z).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1   = Go < Gy < G <                                                      •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               < G -i < G = AuUFo
Since T(z) e         # by the remarks after Theorem 7.2, we have a{T(zY z\ = T(z)" a(z).                                                                                              l                         l                                                                                             2                                             t                    t




Consequently, if w = T(z)~ l z, then                                                                                                                                                                                with G,-| = p\ [Gi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G _i] = p and Gi/G _i cyclic of order p (see Theorem I.3.4(vii)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :   t                                                                    t



                                                                                                                                                                      n- l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    For each / let F be the fixed field of G (relative to E and Aut^F ). The Fundamental
                                    T(w) = T(z)~ l z                     +                                                                                                                                                                      t                                                                 t

                                                                                                                                          h T(zY (T
                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                     T(z)~ l az H                                                                              z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theorem 2.5 implies that: (i) E        E     E2           E -\ E = K; (ii) [F,_i Ei] 3            x       3                        3        •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3       t        3         t                        :

                                                  = F(z)- F(z) = \ K
                                                                   1
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = [G G _i] = p; and (iii) Aut^F^-i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t   :     t                       G /G _i. Therefore, F;_i is a cyclic extension     =                        t           t


Now let                                                                                                                                                                                                             of Ft of degree p (0 < / < / — 1).

       V     = UW + (W + (7W)((7VV) + + (7W +                                                               (7
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                     «)((7 W)
                                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                                                                                      n-2             n-2              Let F be a cyclic extension field of K of degree n. In view of Proposition 7.7 we
               + (U+ (TU+ 2U + a)(<7 VV) H     (T             <T
                                                                   3             3
                                                                                                                         \-    (U        + (TU      ~\
                                                                                                                                                                               h (7           «)((7           w).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    may, at least in principle, restrict our attention to just two cases: (i) n = char K
Use the fact that a is an automorphism and that                                                                                                                                                                     = p 7* 0; (ii) char K =                                          or char             K = p 5*                                      and (/>,«) = 1 (that is, char KJfn). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    first of these is treated in
                                                                                                                                                        n~ X
                                              = T(U) = U + (TU+ (T U-\                                               2
                                                                                                                                            h (T                      U,


which implies that u =                            — (au-\-a u-\          2
                                                                                                            h        o-
                                                                                                                        n_1 w), to show that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposition 7.8. Let K be a field of characteristic p ^ O.Fwa cyclic extension field
                     v   — av = uw -f w(o-h>) + u(a w) +                                           2                                 3
                                                                                                                              i/((7 H>)     +       •    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                     + w(o- n ~           2
                                                                                                                                                                                              w>)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ofK of degree p if and only if¥ is a splitting field over Kofan irreducible polynomial
                                                             n_1
                                                                   w) = wF(w) = ul K                                                     = «.
                                              -f «((T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of the form x p — x — a e K[x]. In this case F = K(u) where u is any root ofx p — x — a.
                     = i>0-(i?) -1            then since 0- is an automorphism of order n, a n (v~ ) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                          l
      (ii)   If «                         ,



a ( v -i) = a ( v )-i and for each                     1 < / < n - 1,  aKva(v)- 1 ) = a^a^Kv)' 1 Hence:                                                                                               .                   PROOF. (=>) If a is a generator of the cyclic group Aut^F, then
                    N(u) = (va{v)- )(ava\v)- )(a 2 va\v)- )-
                                                        l                    l                                           1
                                                                                                                                 •   •   (cr" !?^)- ) = 1*.
                                                                                                                                                1                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tk fHk) = IF                                     :   K)\ K =p\ K =
                                                                                                                                                                                                .




294                                  CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                               7.   CYCLIC EXTENSIONS                                   295


by Theorem 7.3(ii), whence \ K = v — a(v) for some v e F by Theorem 7.6(i). If                                                                                 order at most n by Theorem III. 6.7. f e   K is said to be a primitive nth root of unity
u = -v, then a(u) = u + l K ^ u, whence u$K. Since [F K] = p there are no                                                :                                     provided f is an nth. root of unity and f has order n in the multiplicative group of nth
intermediate fields, and we must have F = K(u). Note that a(u p ) = (w + 1 A ) P                                                                               roots of unity. In particular, a primitive nth root of unity generates the cyclic group
= u p -f \ K p = u p + 1 A which implies that a(W - u) = (u p + 1 A ) - (u + 1 A )                                                                             of all Arth roots of unity.
= u p — u. Since F is Galois over K and Aut A F = (a), a = u p — u must be in
Therefore, w is a root of x p — x — a e K[x], which is necessarily the irreducible                                                                                REMARKS. If char K = p and p n, then n = p km with (p,m) = 1 and m < n.      \




polynomial of u over K since the degree of u over K is [K(u) K] = [F               = p.                                       :             :
                                                                                                                                                               Thusx n - 1 A - (x m — K ) pk (Exercise III. 1.11). Consequently the nth roots of unity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \

   Recall that the prime subfieldZ p of K consists of the/? distinct elements 0,1 = 1 A                                                                   ,    in      K coincide with the mth roots of unity in K. Since m < n, there can be no primitive
2 = 1A + 1A           /? — 1 = 1a H     hU- (Theorem 5.1). The first paragraph of
                ,   .   .   .
                                ,                         :                                                                                                    nth root of unity in K. Conversely, if char K\n (in particular, if char                             K = 0), then
                                                                                   =                        zZp Since u is a root of                                    ~l
the proof of Theorem 5.6 shows that                                        i
                                                                               p           i   for all   /               .
                                                                                                                                                               nx n        whence x n — 1 A is relatively prime to its derivative. Therefore x n — \ K
                                                                                                                                                                                    0,
x p — x — a, we have for each / sZ p                                                       — (u          i) — a = u v   p — u —   -
                                                                  :   («   +           P           -\-                            -\- i         i              has n distinct roots in any splitting field F of x n — 1a- over K (Theorem III. 6.10).
a = ( u p — u — a)               +    (i p   — i) =           +
                                                              = 0. Thus u + e          = F is a root of      /                                                 Thus the cyclic group of nth roots of unity in Fhas order n and F (but not necessarily
x v — x — a for each zeZp                         ,   whence F contains /? distinct roots of x p — x — a.                                                      K) contains a primitive nth root of unity. Note that if K does contain a primitive
Therefore,     F=                      is          K of x p — x — a. Finally if u +
                                             a splitting field over                                                                                       /'

                                                                                                                                                               A2th root of unity, then K contains n distinct roots of x n — l K      whence F = K.            ,



(/ EZP Cfl is any root of    x p — x  —  a, then clearly #0 + /) = K(u) = F.
    (<=) Suppose F is a splitting field over K of x p — x — a e K[x]. We shall not as-                                                                                  EXAMPLES. 1 A is an nth root of unity in the field K for all n > 1. If
sume that x p — x — a is irreducible and shall prove somewhat more than is stated in                                                                           char K = p ^     and n = p k then 1 A is the only nth root of unity in K. The subfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,


the theorem. If u is a root of x p — x — a, then the preceding paragraph shows that                                                                            Q(/) of C contains both primitive fourth roots of unity (±/) but no cube roots of
K(u) contains p distinct roots of x p — x — a: u,              ..,«-}-(/? —     - K(u).
                                                                                                                                                               unity except 1, (the others being — 1/2 dr ^3 i/2). For each n > 0, e 2 * i/n e C is a
But x p — x — a has at most p roots in F and these roots generate F over        There-                                                                         primitive nth root of unity.
fore, F = ^(w), the irreducible factors of x p — x — a are separable and F is Galois
over # (Theorem 3.11 and Exercise 3.13). Every r e Aut A F = Aut A A^(w) is completely                                                                                 In order to finish our characterization of cyclic extensions we need
determined by r{u). Theorem 2.2 implies that t(u) = u + / for some /eZ p C K.
Verify that the assignment r f— / defines a monomorphism of groups ^ Aut^-F— >Z
                                                      >                                                                                 :
                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                                         ,.



Consequently, Aut A F                  ^
                          Im ^ is either 1 orZp If Aut A F = 1 then [F K] = 1 by the   .                             ,              :

                                                                                                                                                               Lemma 7.10. Let n be a positive integer and K a field which contains a primitive nth
Fundamental Theorem 2.5, whence ue K and x p — x — a splits in K[x]. Thus if
                                                                                                                                                               root of unity f
x p — x — a is irreducible over /T, we must have Aut A F    Zv In this case, therefore,                  =           .




F is cyclic over K of degree p.                                                                                                                                         (i)        7/ d|n, then £        = rj is a primitive dth root of unity in K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        n'd

                                                                                                                                                                       (ii)        If &    |
                                                                                                                                                                                               n and u is a nonzero root of \ d — a e K[x], then x d — a has d distinct
                                                                                                                                                               roots,namely u,7/u,77 2 u,     77
                                                                                                                                                                                                 d-1 u, where rj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e.is a primitive dth root of unity. Fur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                                                                               thermore K(u) is a splitting field ofx d — a over      and is Galois over K.                K
Corollary 7.9.          //K /s a /z<?/^ o/ characteristic p ^                                                        xp      — x — a e K[x],
xp   — x — a is either irreducible or splits in K[x].                                                                                                                  PROOF, (i) f generates a multiplicative cyclic group of order n by definition. If
                                                                                                                                                               d   |
                                                                                                                                                                     then rj = f nld has order d by Theorem 1.3.4, whence 77 is a primitive dth root of
                                                                                                                                                                       A2,

                                                                                                                                                                                               — a, then so is rj u. The elements 77 = 1 A-,
                                                                                                                                                               unity, (ii) If 11 is a root of x d                                                       d'1
    PROOF. We use the notation of Proposition 7.8. In view of the last paragraph of                                                                                                                                                                  r\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,



that proof it suffices to prove that if Aut A F = Im 6 = Z p then x p — x — a is irre-                                                                         are distinct (Theorem 1.3.4). Consequently since 77 e AT, the roots «, rju,         x
                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tf~ u of            .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



ducible. If u and v = u + (i eZ p C K) are roots of x p — x — a, then there exists
                                              i
                                                                                                                                                               x d - a are distinct elements of K{u). Thus K{u) is a splitting field of x d — a over K.
r e Aut A F such that r{u)                   = v and hence r                       :   K(u)      = K(v) (choose r with 6(t) =                       /).
                                                                                                                                                               The irreducible factors of x d — a are separable since all the roots are distinct, whence
Therefore, ^ and u are roots of the same irreducible polynomial in K[x] (Corollary                                                                             K(u) is Galois over K by Theorem 3.11 and Exercise 3.13.

1.9).   Since v was arbitrary this implies that x p — x — a is irreducible.


                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 7.11. Let n be a positive integer and K a field which contains a primitive
      Proposition 7.8 completely describes the structure of a cyclic extension of the
                                                                                                                                                               nth root ofunity f Then the following conditions on an extension fieldFofK are equiv-
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .

first type mentioned                 on p. 293. In order to determine the structure of a cyclic exten-
                                                                                                                                                               alent.
sion of degree n of the second type it will be necessary to introduce an additional
assumption on the ground field K.                                                                                                                                      F is cyclic of degree d, where d n;
                                                                                                                                                                             (i)                                                                   |




    Let K be a field and n a positive integer. An element $ e K is said to be an nth root                                                                              F is a splitting field over K ofa polynomial of the form x n — a e K[x] (in which
                                                                                                                                                                         (ii)

of unity provided f = 1 A (that is, f is a root of x n — 1 A e K[x]). It is easy to see that
                                71
                                                                                                                                                               case F = K(u), for any root u of x n — a);
the set of all nth roots of unity in K forms a multiplicative subgroup of the multiplica-                                                                              (iii)        F     is   a splitting field over                        K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of an irreducible polynomial of the form
tive group of nonzero elements of K. This subgroup is cyclic by Theorem 5.3 and has                                                                            xd      — b £ K[x], where d                    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n (in which case F = K(v), for any root v of x d — b).
                                                                                                                                                              ,




296                                           CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                              8.   CYCLOTOMIC EXTENSIONS                                                        297


             PROOF, (ii) => (i) Lemma 7.10 shows that F = K(u) and F is Galois over K for                                                                                    (b) If there exists a cyclic extension of degree p of K, then there exists a cyclic
any root u of x n — a. If a e Aut A F = Aut A X(w), then o- is completely determined by                                                                                    extension of degree p n for every n > 1. [///«/.- Use induction; if E is cyclic over
a(u), which is a root of x — a by Theorem 2.2. Therefore, o-(w) =
                             n                                                 for some                                                                                    X of degree p n ~ withl
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AuuE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            generated by 0-, show that there exist u,v e Fsuch
i   (0 <          /   < n — 1) by Lemma 7.10. Verify that the assignment <rh f* defines a mono-                                                                            that 7^(1?) = 1* and a{u) -u = v p -v. Then x p -x-ue E[x] is irreducible
morphism from AutA'F to the multiplicative cyclic group (of order ri) of nth roots of                                                                                      and if w is a root, then K(w) is cyclic of degree p n over
unity in K. Consequently, Aut A F is a cyclic group whose order d divides n (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                      7.    If n is an odd integer such that K contains a primitive nth root of unity and char
1.3.5 and Corollary 1.4.6). Hence F is cyclic of degree d over K.
    (i) => (iii) By hypothesis Aut A F is cyclic of order ^ = [F AT] with generator a.                                             :
                                                                                                                                                                            K ^ 2, then AT also contains a primitive 2«th root of unity.
Let 77 = f ^ s # be a primitive dth root of unity. Since
                            71
                                                         NK J'(r]) = u K] = V d =                                                      rj   '

                                                                                                                                                                      8.   If     F is a finite dimensional extension of Q, then F contains only a finite number
Theorem 7.6(ii) implies that     = wa(w)" for some w z F. If v =
                                                         rj              then o-(t?) =
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                           771?
                                                                                                                                                                            of roots of unity.
                  d = d d =
                                                                         lie in K so that
                                                             d =
and o-(^) = (rjv)      v     v
                               d
                                 Since F is Galois
                                               rj  over K, v  .   b must
v       is    a root of x d                  — be         By Lemma 7.10 AT(t?) (Z F and K(t?) is a splitting field                                                    9.   Which roots of unity are contained in the following fields: Q(/), Q(yj2), Q(^3)
                                                                                                                             d'l
over K of x   — b (whose distinct roots are v,rji\
                                 d                       v). Furthermore for each                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                        rj                                                 Q(V5),Q(V- 2 XQ(V-3)?
/(0 <   < d - 1), a (v) = 77^ so that a #(r) ^ A^V). By Corollary 1.9 v and rfv
                  /
                                               {                                1

                                                                                                                                                                               Let p be a prime and assume either (i) char K = p or (ii) char                                    K              K
                                                                                        :
                                                                                                                                                                  1   0. (a)                                                                         ^ p and
are roots of the same irreducible polynomial over K. Consequently, x — b is irre-
                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                           contains a primitive /;th root of unity. Then x p - a z K[x] is either irreducible or
ducible in                       Therefore, [K(v) K] = d = [F K], whence/ = K(v).
                                                                  :                             :
                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                           splits in K[x].
             (iii)    => (ii) If v s F is a root of x d — b e K[x], then F = AT(t?) by Lemma 7.10. Now                                                                     (b) If char    K = p ^ 0, then for any root u of X? - a e K[x], K(u) 9^ K(u p if and                        )
                  = ^^            K v d(nld) = b nld zK so that ft? is a root of * K — a e K[x], where
                                     -   l
                                                                                                                                                                           only if \K(u)    :   K] = p.
a = b nld               .   By Lemma 7.10 again K(£v) is a splitting field of x v — a over    But f £ K
implies that F = K(v)                               = ^(fu).


             It is      clear that the primitive A/th roots of unity play                                                      an important role in the           8.       CYCLOTOMIC EXTENSIONS
proof of the preceding results. Characterization of the splitting fields of polynomials                                                                                    Except for Theorem 8.1 this section is not needed in the sequel. We shall examine
of the form x n — a £ K[x] is considerably more difficult when K does not contain a
                                                                                                                                                                                                      — 1 A with special attention to the case K = Q.
                                                                                                                                                                  splitting fields of the polynomial x n                       ,

primitive nth root of unity. The case when a = 1a                                                           is          considered in Section 8.
                                                                                                                                                                  These splitting fields turn out to be abelian extensions whose Galois groups are
                                                                                                                                                                  well known.
                                                                                                                                                                           A splitting field F over a field K of x n -                       \   K £ K[x] (where n >             1) is called    a

                                                      EXERCISES
                                                                                                                                                                  cyclotomic extension of order n. If char                      K = p 9^             and n = mp with (/;,/") = 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l




                                                                                                                                                                  then a" - 1a = (x m — \y' (Exercise 1II.1 .1 1) so that a cyclotomic extension of order
    l   .    If AT is            replaced by any normal extension N of K containing F in Definition 7.1                                                           n coincides with one of order /??. Thus we shall usually assume that char AT does not
              then this new definition of norm and trace is equivalent to the original one. In                                                                    divide n (that is, char             K =          or is relatively prime to n).
              particular, the new definition does not depend on the choice of N. See Exercise
              3.21.                                                                                                                                                   The dimension of a cyclotomic extension field of order n is related to the Euler
                                                                                                                                                                  function <f of elementary number theory, which assigns to each positive integer n the
    2    .   Let F be a finite dimensional extension of a finite field K. The norm TVa                                                          7"
                                                                                                                                                     and the
                      F                                                                                                                                           number <p(n) of integers such that 1 < i < n and (/» = 1 For example, <^(6) = 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
             trace TK (considered as maps F —> K) are surjective.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




                                                                                                                                                                  and if(p) = p - 1 for every prime /;. Let 7 be the image of s Z under the canonical      /"




    3.       LetQ be a (fixed) algebraic closure of Q and v Q, c Q. Let E be a subfield of                  £                  \
                                                                                                                                                                  projection Z — Z„. It   easily verified that
                                                                                                                                                                                                     is           = if and only if    a unit in the ring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (/',/?)       1                      1   is

             O maximal with respect to the condition c E. Prove that every finite dimen-        \                                                                 Zn (Exercise 1). Therefore the multiplicative group of units in Z has order <^»; for              n

             sional extension of E is cyclic.                                                                                                                     the structure of this group see Exercise 4.

    4.        Let AT be a field, K an algebraic closure of K and a £ Aut/V-X'. Let

                                                              F =     I
                                                                          u £   K a(u) — u  I                   \   .
                                                                                                                                                                  Theorem 8.1. Let n be a positive integer, K a field such that char K does not divide n
             Then Fis a field and every finite dimensional extension of F is cyclic.                                                                              and F a cyclotomic extension ofK of order n.

    5.       If F is a cyclic extension of K of degree p n (p prime) and L is an intermediate                                                                              F = K(C), where f £ F is a primitive nth root of unity.
                                                                                                                                                                            (i)


             field such that F = L(u) and L is cyclic over K of degree p n ~\ then F = K(u).
                                                                                                                                                                           F is an abelian extension of dimension d, where d <^(n)
                                                                                                                                                                           (ii)                                                      the Euler function);
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |




                                                                                                                                                                  ifn is prime F is actually a cyclic extension.
    6.       If char         K = p ^ 0, let K v = \u» - u\uzK\.                                                                                                      (iii) Aut K ¥ is isomorphic to a subgroup of order & of the multiplicative group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of
                  (a)       A cyclic extension field F of K of degree p exists if and only if K # Kp                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                  units ofZ„.
298                                         CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                         8.   CYCLOTOMIC EXTENSIONS                                            299


     REMARKS. Recall that an abelian extension is an algebraic Galois extension                                                                                             (ii)       We prove the first statement by induction on n. Clearly gi(x) = x —                        l   K e P[x].
whose Galois group is abelian. The dimension of F over K may be strictly less than
(p(n). For example, if f is a primitive 5th root of unity in C, then R C R(f) d C,
                                                                                                                                                                    Assume that (ii) is true for all k < n and let f(x) =                          Hg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d (x).   Then fs P[x] by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d\n
whence, [R(f) R] = 2 < 4 = <p(5). If K = Q, then the structure of the group
                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d<n
                                                                                                                                                                   induction hypothesis and in F[x], x n - \ K = f(x)gn (x) by (i). On the other hand
AutQ/7 is completely determined in Exercise 7.
                                                                                                                                                                   x n — \ K zP[x] and /is monic. Consequently, the division algorithm in P[x] implies
                                                                                                                                                                   that x n - \ K = fh + r for some h, r e P[x]                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F[x]. Therefore by the uniqueness of
             SKETCH OF PROOF OF 8.1. (i) The remarks preceding Lemma 7.10 show                                                                                     quotient and remainder (of the division algorithm applied in F[x]) we must have r =
                                                                                                                                          7,-1
that F contains a primitive /7th root of unity f                                       .       By definition 1 A-,f   ,       •
                                                                                                                                  ,   f          e K(£) are        and g n (x) = h e P[x]. This completes the induction. If char K = and P = Q, then a
the /z distinct roots of x                         n   — \k, whence F = K(£). (ii) and (iii). Since the irreducible                                                similar inductive argument using the division algorithm in Z[x] and Q[x] (instead of
factors of x n                — \k are clearly separable, Theorem 3.11 and Exercise 3.13 imply that                                                                P[x], F[x]) shows that gn (x) e Z[jc].
F is Galois over K. If a s Aut K F, then a is completely determined by o-(f ). For some                                                                                 (iii)      deg g n is clearly the number of primitive nth roots of unity. Let f be such a
/(1 <    < n - 1),
                 /      = f by Theorem 2.2. Similarly _1 (f) = V so that f = _1 cj(f)
                                                        l
                                                                                                       (7                                            c7            primitive             root so         that      every other      (primitive)   root    is       a   power of   f.       Then
= f*'. By Theorem I.3.4(v), ij = 1 (mod n) and hence eZ„ is a unit (where z'l—                              I                                              >   7
                                                                                                                                                                   f * (1    <     '   < «) is a primitive /zth root of unity (that is, a generator of G) if and only
under the canonical projection Z —>Z ). Verify that the assignment a h> defines a
                                                                          7i                                                                     J                 if (/,/?)       = 1 by Theorem 1.3.6. But the number of such                           z   is   by definition precisely
monomorphism /from AutA-f to the (abelian) multiplicative group of units of the                                                                                    <p(n).          a
ring Zn (which has order <p(n) by Exercise 1). Therefore, Aui K F    Im / is abelian                                      ^
with order d dividing <p(n). Thus [F K] = dby the Fundamental Theorem 2.5. If n is
                                                                      :
                                                                                                                                                                       REMARKS. Part (i) of the theorem gives a recursive method for determining
prime, then Zn is a field and A\xi K F ^ Im / is cyclic by Theorem 5.3.                                                                                            gn (x) since

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gn(x) =
   Let n be a positive integer, K a field such that char K does not divide /z, and F a
cyclotomic extension of order n of AT. The nth cyclotomic polynomial over K is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d\n
monic polynomial g n {x) = (x — fi)(x - f 2 )-                                             •        — fr) where fi,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                      ,   f r are all the                                                                              d<n
distinct primitive /7th roots of unity in F.
                                                                                                                                                                   For example if p                      is    prime, then g p (x) = (** - \ K )/gi(x) = (x*> - \ K )/{x - \ K )
                                                                                                                                                                   = x p_1 + x p_2 H                          \-x2     +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x -\- l K Using the example preceding Theorem 8.2 we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




   EXAMPLES. gl (x) = x -\k and g (x) = (x - (- U» = x + 1*. If # = Q,          2                                                                                  have for K = Q:
then sato = (* - (-1/2 + V 3 '/ 2 )X* - (-1/2 - ^3i/2)) = x* + * +    and                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                   g 6 to = to - l)/gitog 2 tog 3 to
g to = (x — i)(x +
     4
                   =    + These examples suggest several properties of the
                                             /')              1 .

cyclotomic polynomials.
                                                                                                                                                                                             = to - da* - i)(* + Dto + x + D

                                                                                                                                                                   similarly


Proposition 8.2. Let n be a positive integer, K a field such that char K does not
                                                                                                                                                                                  g l2 to =    U ~ !)/(* - D(x + Dto + x + l)to + l)to ~ + 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a:

                                                                                                                                                                                             = jc -
                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +   1.
divide n and g n (x) //ze n//z cyclotomic polynomial over K.


              (i)    x*   -   1   K = Xlgdto.                                                                                                                           When the base field is the field Q, we can strengthen the previous results
                                                                                                                                                                   somewhat.
             (ii)    The coefficients ofg n (x) He in the prime subfield P of K. // c/z^r K =                                                        and P zj
identified with the field                              Q of rationals, then the coefficients are actually integers.
             (iii)   Deg g n (x) = <£>(n), where <p is the Euler function.
                                                                                                                                                                   Proposition 8.3. Let ¥ be a cyclotomic extension of order n of the field Q of rational
                                                                                                                                                                   numbers and g n (x) the nth cyclotomic polynomial over Q. Then
    PROOF, (i) Let F be a cyclotomic extension of K of order n and f e F a primitive
«th root of unity. Lemma 7.10 (applied to F) shows that the cyclic group G = (f ) of                                                                                        (i)    g n (x) is irreducible in Q[x].
                                                                                                                                                                        (ii)       [F Q] = ^(n), where <p is the Euler function.
all /zth roots of unity contains ail dth roots of unity for every divisor d of n. Clearly
                                                                                                                                                                                         :




   G is a primitive Jth root of unity (where J /?) if and only if |^| = d. Therefore for
         e
                                                                                                                                                                       (iii)       Aut Q F is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of units in the ring Z n                          .
7]                                                                                     |




each divisor d of    gdto = II ( x ~ v) an ^
                                      az,

                                                                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) It suffices by Lemma III.6. 13 to show that the monic
                                                                                                                                                                   polynomial ^ n to is irreducible in Z[x]. Let h be an irreducible factor of g n in Z[x]
                              ^n -             =              -     1?)   = ikii                      - v)) = ii^w.                                                with deg h ^ 1. Then g n {x) = f(x)h(x) with fh e Z[x] monic. Let £ be a root of h and

                                                                               d\n   \r>\      =d                d\n                                               p any prime integer such that (p,n) = 1-
300                                CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                 8.        CYCLOTOMIC EXTENSIONS                                                                                301


        We shall show first that f * is also a root of h. Since f is a root of #„(*), f is a                                                            (c)   If     n       = pi kl --p kr                r          (Pi     distinct            primes;                 k{   >   0),   then        <p(n)            =
                                                                              p
primitive wth root of unity. The proof of Proposition 8.2(iii) implies that f is also a                                                           nd - \/p0 (1 - 1/P2)-                                        -(1        - 1/Pr).
primitive wth root of unity  and therefore a root of either for
                                                               r
                                                                h. Suppose   f
                                                                               p is not a
                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                                        (d)   £
                                                                                                                                                              d\n
                                                                                                                                                                    <f(<0       = n.

root of A. Then f * is a root of /(*) = ]C                                        and hence f is a root of            =    ^     aixiv   '              (e)   <f(n)      =   ^         dfjL(n/d), where /x is the Moebius function defined                                                 by

Since h is irreducible in Q[x] (Lemma III.6.13) and has f as a root, /* must divide                                                                                                                                        = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1         if        /i

      by Theorem 1.6, say        = h(x)k(x) with A: e    By the division algorithm           QM-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (    — 1)' if n is a product of                       /       distinct primes
in Z[x], /(*")                = h(x)ki(x) + nC*) with                  /c ls ri   e Z[*].   The uniqueness statement of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2

division algorithm in Q[*] shows that k(x) = kiix) e Z[*]. Recall that the canonical
                                                                                                                                                                                                           if     p divides n for some prime p.
projection          (denoted on elements by 6|->5) induces a ring epimorphism
                           Z-^ZV                                                                                                             3.   Let (f be the Euler function.

Z[x]-+Z              p [x]    defined       by g =       £ Whg = 2 ^
                                                        _i =                          i=_0
                                                                                                 (Exercise III.5.1). Conse-                       (a)
                                                                                                                                                  (b)
                                                                                                                                                         <p(n) is even for n > 2.

                                                                                                                                                         Find all n >     such that <p(n) = 2.
quently, in                Zp [x], f(x") = h(x)k(x). But in Zp [x],f(x*) =                                   (since char   Zp -      /?).
                                                                                                                                                  (c)    Find all pairs («,/?) (where n,p > 0, and p is prime) such that <p(n) = w/P-
Therefore,                                                                                                                                        [See Exercise 2.]

                                                      7(jc)"   =                      eZP [*].   -




                                                                                                                                             4. (a)      If /? is an odd prime and n                                       > 0, then the multiplicative group of units in the
Consequently, some irreducible factor of h\x) of positive degree must divide fix)?                                                                ring    Zpn is cyclic of order p n ~\p — 1).
and hence /(*)                 mZ
                 p [x]. On the other
                                     hand, since gn (x) is a factor of x n - 1, we have                                                           (b) Part (a) is also true if p      = 2 and < n < 2.                                  1

vn      _   i    = gn ( x )r(x) = f(x)h(x)r(x) for some r(x) £ Z[x]. Thus inZp [x]                                                                (c)    If n      > 3, then the multiplicative group of units in Z2n is isomorphic to
                                                xn - 1 =               -   1      = f(x)h(x)Hx).                                                  Z ©Z2n -
                                                                                                                                                   2                2.




Since /and /i have a common factor, * - I sZp [x] must have a multiple root. This
                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                       n                                                                                                                                                                                   t




contradicts the fact that the roots of x — I are all distinct since (p,n) = 1 (see the
                                        n                                                                                                    5. If f{x)
                                                                                                                                                            i=0
                                                                                                                                                               =    ^ x%      be the polynomial^ aiX ia Establish the following
                                                                                                                                                                             tf t          let fix 8 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                 i=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




Remarks preceding Lemma 7.10). Therefore f p is a root of h(x).                                                                                   properties of the cyclotomic polynomials gn ix) over Q.
   If r s Z is such that 1 < r < « and (r,/i) = 1, then r =                    where k >                                                                                                               k~ l
                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                 {                  (a) If p is prime and k > 1, then g kix) = g P ixP      ).
                                                                                                                                                                                       p
and each p is a prime such that ip i9 n) = 1 Repeated application of the fact that f p is
                       {
                                                                            .                                                                          (b) If «       = /?i     ri -   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (/? t     distinct primes; rt                  > 0), then
a root of /z whenever f is, shows that f is a root of /z(x). But the f
                                             r                             r
                                                                               < r < n and                                                                                                                            -^-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     gnix) = gp,...^-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1              1


( rj/2 ) = ) are precisely
                 1         all of the primitive nth roots  of unity by the proof of Proposi-                                                                                                                                                                         ).


                                             JJ (x - f ) = ^W, whence                = /z(x).
                                                          r
tion 8.2(iii). Thus h(x) is divisible by                                                                                                               (c)    If /2 is odd, then g 2n ix)                                 = gn i~x).
                                                                   1   <r <n
                                                                   (r,n)    =l                                                                         id) If p is a prime and pJfn, then £ pn (x)                                               = gn (x»)/gn (x).
Therefore, gn (*) is irreducible.                                                                                                                      (e)    #*(*) = II (^
                                                                                                                                                                                               n/£f   — iy \ where(d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /x is   the Moebius function of Exercise 2 (e).
        (ii)    Lemma 7.10 shows that F = Q(f), whence                                                                                                                        d\n

                                                                                                                                                       (0 S„(l) = P if w =P* (A: > 0),                                           if n       = 1, and       1   otherwise.
                                            [F   :   Q] = [Q(f )       :   Q] = deg g n = *(«)

by Proposition 8.2 and (i). (iii) is a consequence of (ii), Theorem 8.1, and Exer-
                                                                                                                                             6.   Calculate the nth cyclotomic polynomials over                                                        Q for all positive n with n < 20.
cise 1.                                                                                                                                           Let Fn be a cyclotomic extension of
                                                                                                                                             7.                                          Q of order n. Determine the structure of
                                                                                                                                                  AutQF* for every n. [Hint: if Un * denotes the multiplicative group of units inZn                                                                                        ,

        REMARK. A nontrivial theorem of Kronecker states that every abelian exten-                                                                                                                     r


sion of          Q     is    contained in a cyclotomic extension.                                                                                 then show that Un * =                                        UPi ni* where n has prime decomposition n = p\                                   ni   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pr   nr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .

                                                                                                                                                                                                 i    =i
                                                                                                                                                  Apply Exercise 4.]

                                                           EXERCISES                                                                         8.   Let Fn be a cyclotomic extension of                                              Q of order n.
  1 .    If / s Z, let 7 denote the image of / inZn under the canonical projection Z
                                                                                     —>Zn                                                .
                                                                                                                                                       (a)    Determine AutQF5 and all intermediate fields.
                                                                                                                                                       (b)    Do the same for F
         Prove that 7 is a unit in the ringZn if and only if (/,«) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                           8.
                                                                                                     1 .   Therefore the multipli-
                                                                                                                                                       (c)    Do the same for F                                  if f is a        primitive 7th root of unity what is the irre-
         cative group of units in Zn has order ip(n).
                                                                                                                                                                                                           7 ;

                                                                                                                                                  ducible polynomial over                                  Q of f + f _1 ?
 2.      Establish the following properties of the Euler function <p.
           (a) If p is prime and n > 0, then <p(p ) = p {\ - l/p) = p ~\p -
                                                        n
                                                 n                    n
                                                                                                                           1).               9.   If n    > 2 and f is a primitive nth root of unity over Q, then [Q(f + f _1 )                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q]
                (b) If im,n)       =    1   ,   then ip(mn) = <pim)<pin).                                                                         = <Pin)/2.
302                               CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                         9.           RADICAL EXTENSIONS                                                                                            303


10.   (Wedderburn) A finite division ring D is a field. Here is an outline of the proof                                                                              Conversely suppose that there exists such a tower of fields and that En contains
      (in which E* denotes the multiplicative group of nonzero elements of a division                                                                            a splitting field of /(that is,                             En contains all solutions of f(x) = 0). Then
      ring E).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          En = K(U U ...,!/„)
           (a)    The center K of D is a field and D is a vector space over K, whence \D\ = q n
      where q = \K\ > 2.                                                                                                                                         and each solution is of the form
           (b) If       ?±    a s Z), then N(a) = {d e D                      \
                                                                                  da = ad)              is       a subdivision ring of                       D
      containing K. Furthermore, \N(a)\                              = q where r
                                                                          r
                                                                                           \
                                                                                                   n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                f(u u    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         u n )/g(u u ...,«„)                          (f,g s K[x u                        .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,       *„])

           (c)    ^ a e D - K, then N(a)* is the centralizer of a in the group D* and
                 If                                                                                                                                              by Theorem 1.3. Thus each solution is expressible in terms of a finite number of ele-
      [D*    :      = (q n — l)/(<7 — 1) for some r such that 1 < r < n and r n.
                 N(a)*]
                                                            r
                                                                                                                                                         \       ments of AT, a finite number of field operations and u u  u n (which are obtained by                                 .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,


           (d) q —
                n    = — + 2^ (</ n — l)/(cy — 1), where the last sum taken over a
                          1       r/            1
                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                 extracting roots). But this amounts to saying that there is a "formula" for the solu-
                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                 tions of the particular given equations. These considerations motivate the next two
      finite     number of integers r such that 1 < r < n and r                                                  |
                                                                                                                      n. [Hint:     use the class
                                                                                                                                                                 definitions.
      equation of Z)*; see pp. 90-91.]
           (e)    For each primitive nth root of unity f e C,                                                    |#   — f| > q — 1, where
      |a   +     6/|   = -\Ja +
                              2
                                       />
                                            2
                                                for a       + bi z C. Consequently,                     |g„(tf)|       > — 1, where gn is
                                                                                                                          <?


      the A2th cyclotomic polynomial over Q.
                                                                                                                                                                 Definition 9.1.                    An extension field ¥ of a field K is a radical extension oj K //
             The equation in (d) is impossible unless n = 1, whence K = D. [Hint:
           (f)
                                                                                                                                                                 F = K(ui,      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                u n ), some power of Ui lies in                                 K and for each > 2, some power of             i



      Use Proposition 8.2 to show that for each positive divisor r of n with r ^ n,                                                                              lies in   K(ui,    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                ,   Ui_i).

      fJfx) = (x n - l)/(x r - 1) is in Z[x] and f(x) = gn (x)h (x) for some h (x) s Z[x].                   r                           r


      Consequently, for each such r g n (q) divides f (q) in Z, whence gn (q) (q — 1)  r                                                     \
                                                                                                                                                                     REMARKS. If ur s K(u u                                       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w _ ) then w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t   is      a root of
      by (d). This contradicts (e).]

                                                                                                                                                                 Hence K(u u        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    u ) is finite dimensional algebraic over K(u u
                                                                                                                                                                                                     t                                                                                                            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w _i) by Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t


                                                                                                                                                                 1.12. Therefore every radical extension                                                   F of K is finite dimensional algebraic over K
                                                                                                                                                                 by Theorems 1 .2 and 1.11.
9.    RADICAL EXTENSIONS
      Galois theory had its historical origin in a classical problem in the theory of                                                                            Definition 9.2. Let                     K be a field and f s K[x], The equation f(x) - is solvable by
equations, which              may be intuitively but reasonably accurately stated as follows.                                                                    radicals if there exists a radical extension                  Fo/K and a splitting field Eoff over K
Given a field K, does there exist an explicit "formula" (involving only field opera-                                                                             such that F        3 E 3 K.
tions and the extraction of Arth roots) which gives all the solutions of an arbitrary
polynomial equation f(x) =       (feK[x])l If the degree of / is at most four, the
                                                                                                                                                                     Definition 9.2 is the first step in the formulation of the classical problem of find-
answer is affirmative (for example, the familiar "quadratic formula" when deg f = 2
                                                                                                                                                                 ing a "formula" for the solutions of f(x)    = that is valid for every polynomial
and char K ^ 2; see also Exercise 5). We shall show, however, that the answer is
                                                                                                                                                                 fe K[x] of a given degree r (such as the quadratic formula for r = 2). For whatever
negative in general (Proposition 9.8). In doing so we shall characterize certain field
                                                                                                                                                                 the precise definition of such a "formula" might be, it is clear from the discussion
extensions whose Galois groups are solvable (Theorem 9.4 and Proposition 9.6).
                                                                                                                                                                 preceding Definition 9.1 that the existence of such a "formula" should imply that
    The first task is to formulate a precise statement of the classical problem in field-                                                                        every polynomial equation of degree r is solvable by radicals.
theoretic terms. Throughout the discussion we shall work in a fixed algebraic closure
                                                                                                                                                                    Thus in order to demonstrate the nonexistence of such a formula, it suffices to
of the given base field K. Intuitively the existence of a "formula" for solving a
                                                                                                                                                                 prove that a specific polynomial equation is not solvable by radicals. We shall now
specific polynomial equation f(x) =    means that there is a finite sequence of steps,                                                                           develop the necessary information in order to do this (Corollary 9.5) and shall leave
each step being a field operation (addition, multiplication, inverses) or the extraction                                                                         the precise formulation of the classical problem for the appendix.
of an A2th root, which yields all solutions of the given equation. Performing a field
operation leaves the base field unchanged, but the extraction of an Arth root of an
element c in a field E amounts to constructing an extension field E(u) with u n z E                                                                              Lemma 9.3. IfF is a radical extension field ofK and N is a normal closure off over
(that is, u       = \/ c). Thus the existence of a "formula" for solving f(x) =                                                              would in            K (Theorem 3.16), then N is a radical extension ofK.
effect imply the existence of a finite tower of fields


                                                    K = E a E! a()
                                                                                  •   aE       n
                                                                                                                                                                     SKETCH OF PROOF. The proof consists of combining two facts, (i) If F is
                                                                                                                                                                 any finite dimensional extension of K (not necessarily radical) and       is the normal                                                                                   N
such that En contains a splitting field of / over K and for each i >                                                           1,   E = E _ {u )
                                                                                                                                     {           l   l       x
                                                                                                                                                                 closure of F over K, then    is the composite field E E2N   Er where each E is a sub-                            X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,                                      {


with some positive power of u lying in £ _i.            {             t
                                                                                                                                                                 field of  Nwhich is AT-isomorphic to F. (ii) If Eu    Er are each radical extensions of          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )




304                                                                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                       9.               RADICAL EXTENSIONS                                                       305



K (as is the case here since F is radical), then the composite field EiE                                                                                                                                                     2 •   •       •   E is a radical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T        where F(f) is Galois over F (Theorem 8.1) and hence over K as well (Exercise
extension of K. These statements are justified as follows.                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.15(b)). The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 shows that Aut^F           Aut*F(f)/Aut F F(f).                                           ^
    (i) Let  wu      wn be a basis of F over
                                           {
                                                  and let f be the irreducible poly-
                                                       .       .           .
                                                                                   ,            \
                                                                                                                                                        K                                                                                                       Consequently, it suffices by Theorem IL7.11 to prove that Aut*F(f) is solvable. Ob-
nomial of Wi over K. The proof of Theorem 3.16 shows that TV is a splitting field of                                                                                                                                                                            serve that K(£) is an abelian Galois extension of K (Theorem 8.1), whence

{   fu   •       •       •
                                 ,fn]              over K. Let v be any root of f in N. Then there is a ^-isomorphism                                                                                                                                           Aut K K(£)             ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AutxF(f)/Aut/f( f) F(f) by the Fundamental Theorem 2.5. If we knew
a   :
        #Oy) ^ #0) such that                                          = v by Theorem 1 .8. By Theorem 3.8 a extends to a                                                                                                                                        that Aut/r f)F(f) were solvable, then Theorem II.7.11 would imply that AuU-F(f) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (



X-automorphism r of N. Clearly r(F) is a subfield of N which is ^-isomorphic to F                                                                                                                                                                               solvable (since Aut K K(£) is abelian, hence solvable). Thus we need only prove that

and contains r(w y ) = o<H>y) = u. In this way we can find for every root v of every f                                                                                                                                                                          AutK(f)F(f) is solvable.
a subfield E of N such that veE and E is ^-isomorphic to F. If E u                 Fr are the                                                                                                                                          .       .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             By assumption, F(f) is Galois over K and hence over any intermediate field. Let
subfields so obtained, then E Er    Er is a subfield of TV which contains all the roots of                  x
                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F = K(£) and
          ,fn, whence FiF2    -Er = N.
fufa*        -       -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E = Ktf, Ul ,...,Ui)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                                                              (/= 1,2,..., /i)
    (ii) Suppose r = 2, £i = #(wi,         u k ) and F2 =              v m ) as in Definition                       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   •   .   ,



9.1. Then FiF2 = #(«i,                     v m ) is clearly a radical extension of K. The       .   .   .   ,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                so that En                 = K(£,u u ...,«») = F(f). Let // = Aut £i F(f), the corresponding sub-      t



general case is similar.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        group of Auttf f)F(f) under the Galois correspondence. Schematically we have:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F(f) = Fn                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J/n    = 1
Theorem 9.4. IfF is a radical extension field ofK and E is an intermediate field, then
Aut^E is a solvable group.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E    l       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     //t   = Aut £ -F(f)
   PROOF. If K is the fixed field of E relative to the group Aut*F, then E is Galois                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        u
over K Aut Ko E = Aut^F and F is a radical extension of K (Exercise 1). Thus we
                             ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          £-i              I                           ft-i    = AuU^FCf
may assume to begin with that E is algebraic Galois over K. Let N be a normal
closure of F over K (Theorem 3.16). Then TV is a radical extension of Kby Lemma 9.3
and E is a stable intermediate field by Lemma 2.13. Consequently, restriction
(a h-> a E) induces a homomorphism
                             |
                                           A\xt K N —» Aut*:F. Since TV is a splitting                                               :                                                                                                                                                                      K(0 = F                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ho = AutK (f) F(f)
field over K (and hence over E) every a s Aut^F extends to a ^-automorphism of TV

by Theorem 3.8. Therefore 6 is an epimorphism. Since the homomorphic image of a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                By Lemma                                    K({)                   a primitive w th root of unity for each
solvable group is solvable (Theorem II. 7. 11), it suffices to prove that Aut K N is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7.10(i)                   contains                                                     t




solvable. If                                   K is the fixed field of N                                                        relative to AuUW, then                                                                  N   is     a radical Galois
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /   (/   =     1 ,2,   ...   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n).   Since            e   F _i and F = Ei_ (ui), each F is a cyclic extension of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t                           2               x              t
                                                   Y


                                                                                                                                N = Aut K N. Therefore, we may return to our                                                                                    F _ by Lemma 7.10 (ii) (with d = m,) and Theorem 7.11(ii) (with n = wj. In par-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t    L
extension of Ki (Exercise 1) and Aut Kl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ticular, E is Galois over F _L The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 implies that for each
original notation and with no loss of generality assume that F =                                                                                                                                                            E and F is a Galois                                    x                               t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /=1,2, ...,/! Hi^H^x and H^/Hi ^ Aut^F^, whence H^/Hi is cyclic
radical extension of K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                abelian. Consequently,
        If           f = K(u u       K and w mt e K(u u    .Wi_0 for > 2, then we
                                                                   .           .
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                           u n ) with wi mi e                                  t                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /


may assume that char K does not divide w This is obvious if char K = 0. If char K                                                        t .                                                                                                                                                            1    = //„ <                         <   •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     < // = AutK f)F(f) (


= p ^ and nn =         with (r,/?) = 1, then wj e #(wi,          so that   is purely
                                                                                   r/?<
                                                                                                                                                   p<
                                                                                                                                                                            .       .       .       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a solvable series (Definition II. 8. 3). Therefore, Autxcn^Cf) is solvable by Theo-
                                   But F is Galois and thus separable over K (Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is
inseparable over #(w,,                                                                      .   .   .   ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rem II. 8. 5.
rem 3.11), whence F is separable over K(u u        w _0 (Exercise 3.12). Therefore                                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                    ,   t


it's K(u u     Ui- ) by Theorem 6.2, and we may assume m = r.
                                   .   .       .   ,                   X                                                                                                                                        y


    If m = wira 2   w„, then by the previous paragraph char K (= char F) does not
                                                       -       •           •




divide m. Consider the cyclotomic extension F(f) of F, where f is a primitive wth                                                                                                                                                                               Corollary 9.5. Let K be a field andfzK[x}. If the equation f(x) -                                                                   is   solvable by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                radicals, then the Galois group off is a solvable group.
root of unity (Theorem 8.1). The situation is this:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PROOF. Immediate from Theorem 9.4 and Definition 9.2.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EXAMPLE. The polynomial / = x - Ax + 2 e Q[x] has Galois group S (see       b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the example following Theorem 4.12), which                                                                   is   not a solvable group (Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      — 4x -f 2 = is not solvable by radicals and there can be no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                II.7.12). Therefore, x h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "formula" (involving only field operations and extraction of roots) for its solutions.
306                                CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                               APPENDIX: THE GENERAL EQUATION OF DEGREE n                               307


    Observe that the base field plays an important role here. The polynomial                                                                                      N^         ^1
x b — 4x + 2 =      is not solvable by radicals over Q, but it is solvable by radicals

over the field R of real numbers. In fact, every polynomial equation over R is solvable                                                                           U            A
by radicals since all the solutions lie in the algebraic closure C = R(z') which is a
radical extension of R.
                                                                                                                                                                  P           J = AuipN

      We close this section by proving a partial converse to Theorem 9.4. There is no
difficulty ifK has characteristic zero. But if char K is positive, will be necessary to    it
                                                                                                                                                                  U            A
place some restrictions on it (or alternatively to redefine "radical extension"                              — see
Exercise 2).                                                                                                                                                                   Aui M N

                                                                                                                          The Fundamental Theorem 2.5 implies that P is Galois over                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                      and that
Proposition 9.6. Let E be a finite dimensional Galois extension field ofK with                                            A\x\ M P      =
                                                                                                                                     Aut M N/J. But [AutMN:./] = p by construction, whence Aut M P          Zp       =            .




solvable Galois group AutnE. Assume that char K does not divide [E K]. Then there                   :
                                                                                                                          Therefore, Pisa cyclic extension of           M
                                                                                                                                                                and P = M(w), where u is a root of some (irre-
exists a radical extension FofK such that F    E    K.         3           3                                              ducible) x p - a s M[x] (Theorem 7.11). Thus P is a radical extension of          and      M
                                                                                                                          [N P] < [N M] = [F K] = n. Since Aui P N = J is solvable and N is Galois over
                                                                                                                                :               :             :




      REMARK. The requirement that E be Galois over K is essential (Exercise 3).                                          P (Theorem 2.5), the induction hypothesis implies that there is a radical extension F
                                                                                                                          of P that contains N. Pis a clearly radical extension of        M (Exercise   4). This completes

      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 9.6. Since Aut A £ is a finite solvable group,                                     it   has a    the proof of case (ii).

normal subgroup H of prime index p by Proposition II. 8. 6. Since E is Galois over K,
\Aut K E\ = [E:K] (Theorem 2.5), so that char KJ(p. Let N =            be a cyclotomic
extension of E, where f is a primitive pth root of unity (Theorem 8.1). Let    = K(£);                  M                Corollary 9.7. Let K be a field and f s K[x] a polynomial of degree n > 0, where
then we have                                                                                                             char       K does not divide n! {which is always true when char K = 0). Then the equation
                                                        N = £(f)                                                         f(x)       =   is solvable by radicals if    and only if the Galois group ofiis solvable.

                                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF. (<=) Let E be a splitting field of /over K. In view of
                                                                                                                         Proposition 9.6 we need only show that E is Galois over #and char KJ([E K]. Since      :


                                                                                                                         char KJf n the irreducible factors of /are separable by Theorem IIL6.10 and Exercise
                                                                                                                                        !



                                                                                                                         III. 6.3, whence E is Galois over K (Theorem 3.11 and Exercise 3.13). Since every
                                                           K
                                                                                                                         prime that divides [E K] necessarily divides n\ (Theorem 3.2), we conclude that
                                                                                                                                                          :



                                                                                                                         char KJ([E K}.
N   is finite dimensional Galois over E (Theorem 8.1) and hence over K as well (Exer-
                                                                                                                                            :




cise 3.15(b)).         Now Mis clearly a radical extension of K. Consequently, it will suffice
(by Exercise 4) to                 show that there is a radical extension of                M that contains N.
      First observe that             E is a stable intermediate field of Wand                   (Lemma 2.13). Thus
                   E) induces a homomorphism
restriction (a f-* a           \
                                                   Aut M      AuUE. If a s Aut M N,
                                                                       :               N                                 APPENDIX: THE GENERAL EQUATION OF DEGREE n
then <r(f) = f Hence if a s Ker 0, we have a = 1 v Therefore 6 is a monomorphism.
                        .                                          .
                                                                                                                            The motivation for our discussion can best be seen by examining polynomial
   We now prove the theorem by induction on n = [E K]. The case n = 1 is trivial.
                                                                               :
                                                                                                                         equations of degree 2 over a field K with char K ^ 2. Here and below there will be
Assume the theorem is true for all extensions of dimension k < n and consider the                                        no loss of generality in restricting consideration to monic polynomials. If n and t 2 are
two possibilities:                                                                                                       indeterminates, then the equation

      (i)    Aut M N        is isomorphic under 6 to a proper subgroup of A\xi K E\
                                                                                                                                                                      x 2 - hx + h =
      (ii)   6   :   Aut M W       = AuU-E.
                                                                                                                         over the field K(t u t 2 ) of rational functions in t u t 2 is called the general quadratic equa-
In either case Aui M                N   issolvable (Theorem IL7.11) and TV is a finite dimensional                       tion over K.           Any (monic) quadratic equation over K may be obtained from the
Galois extension of K                   and hence of M. In case (i) [N M] = \Aut M N\ < \Aut K E\
                                                                                   :
                                                                                                                         general quadratic equation by substituting appropriate elements of             K for h and   t2 .   It
= [E K] = n, whence the inductive hypothesis implies that there is a radical exten-
         :
                                                                                                                         is easy to verify that the solutions of the general quadratic equation (in                  some
sion of      M
           that contains N. As remarked in the first paragraph, this proves the theo-                                    algebraic closure of K{t u t 2 )) are given by:
rem in case (i). In case (ii), let J = 6~ (H). Since H is normal of index p in Aut A £, J is
                                                    l




normal of index p in Aui M N. Furthermore J is solvable by Theorem II.7.11. If P
is the fixed field of J (relative to Aut^^V), then we have:
308                                            CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           APPENDIX: THE GENERAL EQUATION OF DEGREE n                                                                                                                                                                                                                             309


where n = n\ K for n s Z. This is the well known quadratic formula. It shows that the                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sn (see p. 253). S n is solvable if and only if n < 4 (Corollary II.7.12 and Exercise
solutions of the general quadratic equation lie in the radical extension field K(ti,t 2 )(u)                                                                                                                                                                                                             II. 7.10). Therefore, if n (x) -   is solvable by radicals then n < 4 by Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p                                                           9.5.
with u 2 = h 2 — 4/ 2 In order to find the solutions of x — bx          c =    (b,c e K) one                                                                                                         +                                                                                                   [Conversely if n < 4 and char K = 0, then n x ) =
                                                            2
                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p (         is solvable by radicals by
need only substitute b,c for /i,r 2 Clearly the solutions lie in the radical extension K(u)
                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Corollary 9.7.]
with u 2 = b 2 — 4c e K. We now generalize these ideas to polynomial equations of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     In order to construct the isomorphism                                                                                                                        F^ K(xi, ...,*„) we                                                                                               first                observe that
arbitrary degree.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the subfield E of K( Xl                                                                                                       x n ) is precisely K(fh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,/n ) by Theorem 2.18, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,    .       .           .           ,                                                                                       .      .    .




      Let AT be a field and n a positive integer. Consider the field K(t u ...,/„) of ra-                                                                                                                                                                                                             /i,         .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,fn are the elementary symmetric functions. Next we establish a ring isomor-
tional functions over    K in the indeterminates t u      /„. The polynomial                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      phism K[t u ...,/„]    K[fu ...,/,] as follows. By Theorem III.5.5 the assignment   ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g(t u       h* g(/i, ...,/,) (in particular n h* /) defines an epimorphism of rings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tn )
                             - hX              n~                           n'2
     Pn (x) = X
                         n                             l
                                                           +       t2   X            +     •       •       •
                                                                                                                   + (- ir^tn-lX + (~ l)                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tn       £ K(t U                 •    •   •           /»)[*]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       •       -       ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6 K[t u ..,/„] -> K[fu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fn ]. Suppose g(t u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tn )  0, so that g(fu  fn ) =                   .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                                                              .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,                                                                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,


is   called the general polynomial of degree n over                                                                                                K and the equation p n (x) =                                                                                                                 is    in K[fu ...,/„] cz /^(x,,     xj. By definition                                                       .           .          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,



called the general equation of degree n over K} Note that any (monic) polynomial of
                                                                                                                   n~l
degree n in K[x], say f(x) = x
                                                                             n
                                                                                     -f aix                              -\            h a n ~\x                       + a may be obtained from
                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 <t'i      <       .       .       .       <ik<n
the general polynomial p n (x) by substituting (— l) tf t for ft
                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                 .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and                          hence                                             = g(/i,           .           .   * n ),  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /n ( Xl,       f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^)).     = ^Z^,                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                            .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                       ,       .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                            Since

      The preceding discussion makes the following definition quite natural. We say
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g(f^---,fn)                                                               is    a   polynomial           indeterminates x u         x n over      in       the                                                                                                 .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                            K and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F = ^(wi,                                             .   .       .   ,   u n ) is a field containing AT, substitution of   for jct yields:
that there is a formula for the solutions of the general equation of degree n provided
that this equation is solvable by radicals over the field K(t u                                                                                                                                                  •            t n ). If p n (x) =                                               is                                                                              = g(Mu                                                         u n ),                                                                                          = g(t u
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                                                                                                                                           ly           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .       ,            .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   ,   /„(«!,           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                                                      .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .       ,       r n );

solvable by radicals, then the solutions of any (monic) polynomial equation of degree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      thus ^ is a monomorphism and hence an isomorphism. Furthermore 6 extends
n over K may be found by appropriate substitutions in the solutions of p n {x) = 0.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to an

Having precisely formulated it, we can now settle the classical problem with which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      isomorphism of quotient fields 6 K(t u ...,/,)           K(fu ...,fn ) = E (Exercise                                                                       :                                                                =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      III. 4.7). Now F = K(u      u n ) is a splitting field over K(ti, ...,/„) of n (x) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u                                                    p                    .           .           .       ,
this section was introduced.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h> pn (x) = x - /i^r 1 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      under the obvious map on polynomials induced by d,p n (x)                         "                                                                                                                                                                                                                         71                          71



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /2X n- 2                                                   + (-1)% = (x - Xl )(x - x                                                                                      2 )-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (x              - xn                      )                (see                p.                       252).                       Clearly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K( Xl
Proposition 9.8. {Abel) Let K be a field and n a positive integer. The general equa-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x n ) is a splitting field of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              over K(fu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /n ) =    Therefore by Theo-                                                                                                                                     .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,




tion of degree n is solvable by radicals only ifn                                                                                      < 4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rem 3.8 the isomorphism 6 extends to an isomorphism       K(x u ...,*„) which by                                                                                                                                                              F^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     construction maps K(t ly                                                                      .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,       rv )    onto £ as desired.

      REMARKS. The words "only if in Proposition 9.8 may be replaced by "if and
only if" when char K = 0. If radical extensions are defined as in Exercise 2, then
"only if" may be replaced by "if and only if" for every characteristic. The fact that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EXERCISES
the general equation of degree n is not solvable by radicals for n > 5 does not exclude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1            If       F is a radical extension field of K and E is an intermediate field, then F is a
the possibility that a particular polynomial equation over K of degree n > 5 is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  radical extension of E.
solvable by radicals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.           Suppose that "radical extension" is defined as follows: F is a radical extension of
      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 9.8. Let the notation be as above and let u u                                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .    .   ,   un                K if there is a finite tower of fields K = £ c £i C    CZ En = F such that for                                                                                                                                                        •    •




be the roots of p n (x) in some splitting                                                                                 field    F = K(t                             { ,   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              t n )(u             u   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u n ). Since                                       each        < < n E = E^ui) and one of the following is true: (i) w mt s£" _i for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1                    /                 ,   {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t                   t


p n (x) = (x — ui)(x — u 2 )                                   -
                                                                            (x       — u n in F, a direct calculation shows that
                                                                                                       )                                                                                                                                                                                                          some rm > 0; (ii) char K = p and ^ - « e £ _i. State and prove the analogues of                                                                                                 t


                                                           n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Theorem 9.4. Proposition 9.6, Corollary 9.7, and Proposition 9.8.
                                  tl       = ^2 U ^ '2 =                                                                  Ui U h   •   •       '       »       *n = U\U                      2       -       •       -Ur,;
                                                        =1                            l<i<;<w                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.       Let AT be a field, fs K[x] an irreducible polynomial of degree n                                                                                                                                                                                                               >
                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5 and F a. split-

that is, u      = J}(u u               .   .   .           u n ) where fu                                                     are the elementary symmetric functions in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ting field of /over K. Assume that Aut F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A    S n (See the example following Theo-                                                                                 ^                                .

                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rem 4.12). Let u be a root of fin F. Then
n indeterminates (see the appendix to Section 2). It follows that F = K(u h                                                                                                                                                                                    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (a)                         K(u) is not Galois over K\ [K(u)                                                                                             K] — n and Aut A^(w) -
Now consider a new set of indeterminates *i,         x n and the field K(xi,    xn                                            (    .   .       .                                                                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,        ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1       (and hence is
                                                                                                                                                       ,           J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              solvable).
Let E be the subfield of all symmetric rational functions in K(x\,     x n The basic                                                                                                                                          .   .                   ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (b) Every normal closure over K that contains u also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



idea of the proof is to construct an isomorphism of fields F                                                                                                                                             = K(xi,                          .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x n ) such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              copy of F.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       contains an isomorphic

that K(t u       •   .   •
                             ,   t n ) is          mapped onto E. Then the Galois group Aut^                                                                                                                                                  t   n )F,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of p n (x)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (c) There is no radical extension field E of K such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    that E Z) K(u) Z) K.
will      be isomorphic to Aut E K(x u                                                 .       .       .
                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                   x n ). But Aut E K(x ]y                                       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x„) is isomorphic to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.       If F is a radical extension field of E and £ is a radical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        extension field of K, then F is
      3
          The signs ( — l)                 1
                                               are inserted for convenience in order to simplify certain calculations                                                                                                                                                                                         a radical extension of K.
310                        CHAPTER V FIELDS AND GALOIS THEORY

5.    (Cardan) Let K be a field with char K              2,3    and consider the cubic equation

      x   3
              + aix + a x +
                  2
                       2      tf 3   =   (a t e   Let p = a 2      — and q =     —     —+a    3.




      Let       P = V-q/2 + Jp3 /21 + q2 /4        and   Q = V -q/2 - Jp /21 + q2 /4
                                                                             3
                                                                                          (with
      cube roots chosen properly). Then the solutions of the given equation are
      P -f Q — ai/3; uP u?Q — ai/3; and u 2P uQ — «i/3 where w is a primitive
                              +                           +
      cube root of unity.                                                                                                                CHAPTER VI


                                                                                                   THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS



                                                                                                   In this chapter we shall analyze arbitrary extension fields of a given field. Since
                                                                                                   algebraic extensions were studied in some detail in Chapter V, the emphasis here will
                                                                                                   be on transcendental extensions. As the first step in this analysis, we shall show that
                                                                                                   every field extension    K d F is in fact a two-step extension K d E CZ F, with F
                                                                                                   algebraic over    E and E purely transcendental over K (Section 1). The basic concept
                                                                                                   used here is that of a transcendence base, whose cardinality (called the transcendence
                                                                                                   degree) turns out to be an invariant of the extension of                       K
                                                                                                                                                           by F (Section 1). The notion
                                                                                                   of separability is extended to (possibly) nonalgebraic extensions in Section 2 and
                                                                                                   separable extensions are characterized in several ways.




                                                                                                   1.   TRANSCENDENCE BASES
                                                                                                      The first part of this section is concerned with the concept of algebraic inde-
                                                                                                   pendence, which generalizes the idea of linear independence. A transcendence base
                                                                                                   of a field F over a subfield    K
                                                                                                                                 is the analogue (with respect to algebraic independence)

                                                                                                   of a vector space basis of F over           K
                                                                                                                                         (with respect to linear independence). The cardi-
                                                                                                   nality of a transcendence base of           F over K (the transcendence degree) is shown to be
                                                                                                   an invariant and its properties are studied. In this section we shall frequently use the
                                                                                                   notation u/v for uv~\ where u,v are elements of a field and v ^ 0. Throughout this
                                                                                                   section   K denotes a field.


                                                                                                   Definition 1.1. Let F be an extension field ofK andS a subset of¥. S is algebraically
                                                                                                   dependent over      K if for some positive integer n there exists a nonzero polynomial
                                                                                                   f s K[xi, . . . , x„]   such that   f(si,   .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                               sn)   =     for some distinct   Si,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   s„ e S.   S   is
                                                                                                   algebraically independent over         K ifS is not algebraically dependent over K.
                                                                                                                                                                     311
312                                                                                 CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.                  TRANSCENDENCE BASES                                                                                                                                               313


         REMARKS. The phrase "over K" is frequently omitted when the context is                                                                                                                                                                                            #i(Si) is of the form f(s u      sn )/g(s u                                             .       .       .                                 .   .                       sn ) (st e 50 by Theorem V.1.3. For con-
           A subset S of F is algebraically independent over K if for all n > 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                                     .       ,

clear.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     venience we write <ps for <p(s) and define a                                                                                                                  :       #i(Si) ->                           # (£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2   2)   by
/ s K[x\,                      .       .   .
                                                   ,       xn and distinct si,
                                                                   ]                                                              .       .       .   ,   sn e S,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /(si,          .       .       .       ,       s n )/g(s u         .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,       s n ) h» <rf(<psi,                            .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   <psn )/ag(<psi,             .   .       .       <psn ) e            K(S2).
                                                                                                         /(Jl,...,*n) =                                                            /=0.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                         =*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           For any finite subset {s l9                                                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,           sr] of S x the restriction of a to ^(j,,                                                                                      .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .       ,   sr) is the
Every subset of an algebraically independent set is algebraically independent. In                                                                                                                                                                                          composition
particular, the null set is algebraically independent. Every subset of K is clearly
algebraically dependent. The set [u] is algebraically dependent over K if and only if
u is algebraic over K. Clearly every element of an algebraically independent set is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #l(Sl,                  .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S r)   ^   ^1(^1,                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,   *r)   A#                      2 (*1,                  .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X r)        ^ (v?5i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <pS r ),


necessarily transcendental over K. Hence if F is algebraic over K, the null set is the                                                                                                                                                                                     where the ft- are the ^ -isomorphims of Theorem 1 .2 and & is the unique monomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t



only algebraically independent subset of F.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                phism of quotient fields induced by o\          xr]    A^jq,        xr] and given by                                                  K^,                             .       .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —                       .   .   .   ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kflg) = (°f)/((Tg) (Corollary III.4.6). It follows that a is a well-defined monomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phism of fields. By construction a extends a and agrees with <p on Si. If a is an iso-
         Algebraic (in)dependence may be viewed as an extension of the concept of linear
(in)dependence. For a set S is linearly dependent over         provided that for some                                                                                                                   K                                                                  morphism then so is each &, whence each 2 <7ft _1 is an isomorphism. If <p is bijective
                                                                            x n such                                                                                                                                                                                       as well then it follows that a is an isomorphism.
positive integer n there is a nonzero polynomial f of degree one in K[x u                                                                                                                                                                .   .   .   ,           ]


that f(s u                                                                  =
                            some distinct s» e S. Consequently, every algebraically
                                            .      -
                                                           ,
                                                               sn )                             for
/^dependent set is also linearly independent, but not vice versa; (see the Example
after Definition 1.4 below).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Definition 1.4. Let F be an extension field of Y^. A transcendence base (or basis) ofF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          over         K is a subset So/F which is algebraically independent over K and is maximal
         EXAMPLE. Let K be a field. In the field of rational functions K(x u                                                                                                                                                                 .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x n ) the    (with respect to set-theoretic inclusion) in the set of all algebraically independent sub-
set       of indeterminates                                                                      {*i, ...,*„}                                             is   algebraically independent over K.                                                                 More     sets ofF.
generally, we have:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The fact that transcendence bases always exist follows immediately from a Zorn's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lemma argument (Exercise 2). If we recall the analogy between algebraic and linear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          independence, then a transcendence base is the analogue of a vector-space basis
Theorem 1.2. Let F be an extension field ofK and Si,                                                                                                                               {
                                                                                                                                                                                          s n a subset ofF which is
                                                                                                                                                                                               .    .   .    ,           }

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (since such a basis            is precisely a maximal linearly independent subset by Lemma
algebraically independent over                                                                                                K.                      Then there              is   ^-isomorphism K(si,       sn)                                 .   .   .   ,       =    IV.2.3).             Note, however, that a transcendence base is not a vector-space basis, al-
K(x 1?         .       .       .
                                       ,
                                           x n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          though as a linearly independent set it is contained in a basis (Theorem IV.2.4).

         SKETCH OF PROOF. The assignment x H> s defines a #-epimorphism of                                                                                                {                {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EXAMPLE. If f/g = f(x)/g(x) s K(x) with fig * 0, then the nonzero poly-
rings                  :       K[x u ...,*„]— K[s u                                                                                                   s n ] by Theorems III. 5. 5 and V.1.3. The algebra-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nomial h(y u y 2 ) = g( yi )y 2 - f( yi ) e K[y u y 2 is such that h(x,f/g) = g(x)[ f(x)/ g(x)] -
                                                                                                                         .    .       .       ,



ic       independence of [s u                                                                        .   .       .           sn ]                 implies that 6 is a                              monomorphism. By Corol-                                                                                                                                                                                               ]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f(x) = 0. Thus {x,f/g\ is algebraically dependent in K(x). This argument shows that
                                                                                                                     ,



lary       IIL4.6                                                      extends                           to              a            A'-monomorphism                                          of           fields               (also       denoted                 0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {x}      is      a transcendence base of K(x) over K. The set {x}
K(x u ...,*„)-> K(s u                                                                            .   .   .
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                     sn )         such that 0( f/g) = f(s u                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sn )/g(s u ...,sn )                 =                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is          not a basis since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2       z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [\ K ,x,x ,x ,                   .       .       .]          is        linearly independent in K(x).
f(s u      .       .       .
                                   ,
                                           s n )g(s u                   .       .   .
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                s n )- 1     .           is an epimorphism by Theorem V.1.3(v).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In order to obtain a useful characterization of transcendence bases we need


Corollary 1.3. For i =                                                                               1,2 let Fj                                   be an extension field ofK-, and Si                                                     d Fi with Si
algebraically independent over Ki. // <p                                                                                                                       :   Si   —» S   2       is      an           inject ive             map of sets and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Theorem 1.5. Let F be an extension field ofK, S a subset ofF algebraically inde-
a        Ki — > K 2 a monomorphism offields, then a extends to a monomorphism offields
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pendent over K, and u £ F — K(S). Then S U u is algebraically independent over
     :



a    :   Ki(Si)                        — K (S                  2       2)       such that a(s) = <p(s) for every s e Si. Furthermore if(p is bijective
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {               j                                                                                           K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          if and only if u is transcendental over K(S).
and a an isomorphism, then a is an isomorphism.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PROOF. (<=) If there exist distinct                                                                                                                                                      sn _i zS      and an /e K[x u ...,x n
         REMARK. In particular, the corollary implies that every permutation of an                                                                                                                                                                                        such that/(5i,                                                                       = 0, then u is a root of f(s u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .             sn -i,u)                                                                                                                                sn . u x n ) e K(S)[x n ]. Now
algebraically independent set S over a field                                                                                                                       K extends to a ^-automorphism of K(S);                                                                                               x n ] = K[x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .           .    ,




(just let                      K = K = K and a =                                                                              \       K ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fe K[x u             .   .   .       ,                                                   .       .       .       ,       *«_i][*n],      whence                                                            /= h rxn r + /zr-i-C H           h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1


                                       Y                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /*i*n   +        /zo     with each hi e K[x u                                                        .       .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *w _i]. Since w is transcendental over K(S), we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /(ji,    sn ^,x n ) = 0. Consequently, /z»(5i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   .   .                                sn ^) =   for every /. The algebraic                                                                 .           .

    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.3. For each n > a induces a monomorphism of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                                                                                                                                                     .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          independence of S implies that hi =    for every /, whence / = 0. Therefore S U u)
rings Ki[xi, x n — K [xi, x n (also denoted a; see p. 235). Every element of
                                               .       .   .
                                                                   ,        ]                        2               .   .    .
                                                                                                                                      ,               ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is   algebraically independent.
314                                                     CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.   TRANSCENDENCE BASES                                                                                                                                                                                       315


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF. Let S = {s u            sn and let T be any transcendence                                                              .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,               }

                     Suppose /(«) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .

      (=>)                                                                           where / =                                        a^xi £ ^GS)M- Bv Theorem V.1.3 there is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               base.   We claim that some h e Tis transcendental over Afe,
                                                                                                                          t   =                                                                                                                                                                                               sn ). Otherwise every                                                                                                                                .       .       .    ,



finite       subset                   {si,      .   .       .           sr )         of S such that a { e K(s u                                                                                   .    .   .   ,   s r ) for every      /',   whence           element of T is algebraic over K(s 2                                                                          ,       .       .       .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sn ),                       whence K(s 2                             ,           .    .       .   ,    sn )(T) is algebraic
                                                                    ,


ai = fls u               .   .               s r)/gi(s u                 .   .   •     s r)       for                     some f,gi e K[x u                                                            .   . * r ]. Let g = gig 2 -gn
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                               -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               over K(s 2 ...,$„) by Theorem V.1.12. Since F is algebraic over K(T) by Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                 .       ,                                           ,                                                                                                                             ,


e K[x u . . . , x,] and for each / let fi                                                                     = fgi-                      •
                                                                                                                                                  g _igt+ i-
                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                                                                      g„ e Xfci,        x r ]. Then a =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .   .   ,                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.6,    F is necessarily algebraic over K(T)(s                                                                                            2,       .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sn )            = K(s        2,      .           .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                s n )(T). Therefore,                                             F
                                                                        av) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is algebraic over K(s 2 ,                                                 .       .   .       s n ) by Theorem V.l. 13. In particular, si is algebraic over
f(s u    .   .   .
                     ,
                         s r)/g(si, .                   .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K(s 2       .   .   .       Sn), which is a contradiction (Theorem 1.5).                                                                                                                           Hence some /i e Tis transcen-
                                                                                 X                                    X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,               ,


                                                 /(*) =                                fl**
                                                                                              4           =                                           •       •   >       Sr)/g(si, . . . , 5 r )x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dental over Afe,                                                          sn ). Consequently, { t u s 2i ...,$„)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .       ,                                                                                                                                 is algebraically independent
                                                                        =                 .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                      s r )-Kj2                   Mu      s           •       •       -       ,       Jr)* )-
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               by Theorem 1.5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Now if si were transcendental over K(t u s 2   sn ) then /i,^i,5 2   sn would                                                                                      .       .

(All we have done is to factor out a "common denominator" for the coefficients of /.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,                   .       ,       t                            {                          ,   .   .   .               }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               be algebraically independent by Theorem 1.5. This is obviously impossible since S is
Let      h(x u           .   .   .     f(x u
                                         ,
                                             x ri x) =
                                                 x r )x< s K[x u        ^-* r ,.x]. Since  =    and
                                                                                                  .



                                                            s r ,«) = 0. The algebraic independence
                                                                                                          .       .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                          .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a transcendence base. Therefore, si is algebraic over K(t u s 2                                                                                                                                                                     .                sn ). Consequently,
                              0, we must have h(si,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,       .            .
                                     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
g(si, . . . ,          Sr)'                                                                                                       .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K(S)(ti)= K(t u s     sn )(si) is algebraic over K(h,s        s n ) (Theorem V.1.12),
                     {u\ implies that h = 0, whence / =           for every /. Thus each a, =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2,       .       .

of S U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .                                                                                                                            2,   .   .   .
                                                                                                and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                                                                                                             ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               whence F is algebraic over K(t u s        sn ) (Theorem V.l. 13 and Corollary 1.6).
/ = 0. Therefore u is transcendental over K(S).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2i                           ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Therefore, {^,s     ,s n is a transcendence base of F over K by Corollary 1.6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2,       .       .       .                   \



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A similar argument shows that some t 2 e Tis transcendental over K(t u s Zi  s„),                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .   ,



Corollary 1.6. Le/ F                    ofK and S a subset ofF that is algebraically
                                                                         a/z extension field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               whence t 2 j u s 3  {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sn is a transcendence base. Proceeding inductively (inserting a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   .    .       .       ,               )




independent over K. Then S is a transcendence base ofF over K // and only ifF is                                                                                                                                                                               U and omitting an Si at each stage) we eventually obtain t u t 2    ,tn eT such that                                                                                                                                                ,    .       .    .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {t u ...,t n    is a transcendence base of F over K.        Clearly, we must have
algebraic over K(S).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        }


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T= {/i,...,/„| and hence \S\ = \T\.
      PROOF. Exercise.

    REMARKS. A field F is called a purely transcendental extension of a field K if
F=         where S CI F and 5 is algebraically independent over K. In this case 5 is
necessarily a transcendence base of F over # by Corollary 1 .6. If F is an arbitrary ex-                                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 1.9. Let F be an ex tension field ofK. IfS is an infinite transcendence base of
tension field of K, let S be a transcendence base of F over # and let E = K(S).                                                                                                                                                                                F over K, then every transcendence base ofF over K has the same cardinality as S.
Corollary 1 .6 shows that F is algebraic over E and E is purely transcendental over K.
Finally Corollary 1 .6 and the remarks after Definition 1.1 show that F is an algebraic
extension of K if and only if the null set is a transcendence base of F over K. In this                                                                                                                                                                           PROOF. If T is another transcendence base, then T is infinite by Theorem 1 .8. If
case the null set is clearly the unique transcendence base of F over K.                                                                                                                                                                                        s s S, then s is algebraic over K(T) by Corollary 1 .6. The coefficients of the irreducible
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               polynomial /of s over K(T) all lie in K(T8 ) for some finite subset Ts of T (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V.1.3). Consequently, /s K(Ta )[x] and s is algebraic over K(Ta ). Choose such a finite
Corollary 1.7. IfF is an extension field ofK and F is algebraic over K(X) for some                                                                                                                                                                             subset Ts of T for each s e S.
subset X ofF (in particular, ifF = K(X)), then X contains a transcendence base ofF                                                                                                                                                                                We shall show that U T is a transcendence base of F over K. Since [J T (Z T,               a                                                                                                                                                                                            a
over K.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      szS                                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           this will imply that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U T, = T. As a subset of T the set U T.                                                                                                                                    is       algebraically in-
   PROOF. Let S be a maximal algebraically independent subset of X (S exists by a                                                                                                                                                                          dependent. Furthermore every element of S is algebraic over K(\J Ta ). Conse-
routine Zorn's Lemma argument). Then every u eX — S is algebraic over K(S) by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           quently, K(\J TS XS) is algebraic over
Theorem 1.5, whence K(X) is algebraic over K(S) by Theorem V.1.12. Consequently,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #(U T ) by Theorem V.1.12. Since K(S) <Z                                                                                             s

F is algebraic over K(S) by Theorem V.l .13. Therefore, S is a transcendence base of                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K(U T )(S), every element of K(S) is algebraic over #(U T Since F is algebraic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
F over K by Corollary 1.6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a ).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           over K(S) by Corollary 1.6, F is also algebraic over K(\J Ta (see Theorem V.l. 13).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       )
   As one might suspect from the analogy with linear independence and bases, any
two transcendence bases have the same cardinality. As in the case of vector spaces,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Therefore, by Corollary 1.6 again                                                                        UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a       is a transcendence                                                            base, whence \JT, = T.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              s
we break the proof into two parts.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Finally we shall show that \T\                                                                    < \S\. The sets T need not be mutually disjoint                                           s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and we remedy this as follows. Well order the set S (Introduction, Section 7) and de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           note its first element by 1. Let 7V = Tx and for each                                                                                                                                                   1       < seS, define T/ = T -                                                                     a
Theorem 1.8. Let F be an extension field ofK. IfS is a finite transcendence base
of F over K, then every transcendence base of F over K has the same number of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <«
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ti Clearly each T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                                                             a           is finite.     Verify that                                                       U T = (J T and that the T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a           are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           »                                                                                                                                                                                                           s

elements as S.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mutually disjoint. For each s eS, choose a fixed ordering of the elements of Ta                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :       t   u t2   ,
316                                                                              CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.       TRANSCENDENCE BASES                                                                                  317



.   .
        .       ,
                        t ka .   The assignment U h* (s,i) defines an injective map U T/ —> S X N*. There-                                                                                                                                                                              If #1 and                  K are fields with algebraic closures, FU F respectively, then Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V.3.8 implies that every isomorphism Ki                           ^ K extends to an isomorphism Fi ^ F                 2                                                                   2.
fore by Definitions 8.3                                                                   and 8.4 and Theorem 8.11 of the Introduction we have:                                                                                                                              Under suitable hypotheses this result can now be extended to the case where the
                                         \T\         = IU T.\ = |U T                                                           9 '\   < \S X N*| = |5||N*| = \S\H = \S\.                                                                                                     fields Fi are algebraically closed, but not necessarily algebraic over                                                                                                  K{.


                                                                          s                                   s


Reversing the roles of S and T in the preceding argument shows that |5| < \T\                                                                                                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Theorem 1.12. Let Fi [resp. F 2 be an algebraically closed field extension of a field    ]
whence |5| = \T\ by the Schroeder-Bernstein Theorem 8.6 of the Introduction.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ki [resp. K 2]. // tr.d.F\/Ki = tr.d.F 2 /K 2 then every isomorphism offields Ki                           ,                                                                         =K     2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             extends to an isomorphism Fi                                                     =F              2.




Definition 1.10. Let F be an extension field ofK. The transcendence degree ofF over                                                                                                                                                                                                     PROOF. Let Si be a transcendence base of F                                                                                          t       over   K{.     Since     = |5      2 |,


K (denoted tr.d.F/K) is the cardinal number |S|, where S is any transcendence base ofF                                                                                                                                                                                       a     :   Kx     ^ K extends to an isomorphism a K\(Si) ^ ^5 by Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                             :                                         2)                   1.3.F ist



over K.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      algebraically closed and algebraic over Ki(Si) (Corollary 1 .6) and hence an algebraic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             closure of Ki(Si). Therefore a extends to an isomorphism Fi                                                                                               = F by Theorems V.3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2


    The two preceding theorems show that tr.d.F/K is independent of the choice of S.                                                                                                                                                                                         and V.3.8.
In the analogy between algebraic and linear independence tr.d.F/ K is the analogue
of the vector space dimension [F:K]. The remarks and examples after Definition 1.4
show that tr.d.F/ K < [F K] and that tr.d.F/K =       if and only if F is algebraic               :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EXERCISES
over K.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Note: F is always an extension field of a field K.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 .       (Exchange property) Let S be a subset of F. If u e F is algebraic over K(S) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u is not algebraic over K(S — {v}), where veS, then v is algebraic over
Theorem 1.11. IfF is an extension field ofE and E an extension field ofK, then                                                                                                                                                                                                         K((S- M)U M).
                                                                                         tr.d.F/K = (tr.d.F/E)                                                           + (tr.d.F/K).                                                                                       2. (a)               Use Zorn's Lemma to show that every field extension possesses a trans-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cendence base.

                PROOF. Let S be a transcendence base of E over K and T a transcendence base                                                                                                                                                                                            (b)        Every algebraically independent subset of F is contained in a transcendence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       base.
of F over E. Since S CZ E, S is algebraically dependent over F, whence S f) T = 0.
It suffices to show that S U r is a transcendence base of F over K, since in that case                                                                                                                                                                                       3.                   .   .   .       xn               is a transcendence base                              of K(x u            .   •   •       *n ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       {                      ,        }                                                                                                ,

Definition 1.10 and Definition 8.3 of the Introduction imply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4. If Fi,F2 are intermediate fields, then
                                             tr.d.F/K = \S U T\ =                                                                     |r|       +           \S\         = (tr.d.F/F) + (tr.d.F/X).                                                                                           (i)          tr.d.E^/K > tr.d.Ei/Kfor i = 1,2;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tr.d.F^/ii: < (tr.d.Fi/X)                                                + (tr.d.F /X).
First of all every element of                                                                                 E is algebraic over K(S) (Corollary 1.6) and hence over                                                                                                                        (ii)                                                                                               2


K(S                 U D- Thus K(S U T)(E)                                                                                     is algebraic                      over K(S \J T) by Theorem V.1.12. Since                                                                      5. If           F = #(«i,                         .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               un ) is a finitely generated extension of                                                   K and E is an inter-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mediate field, then E is a finitely generated extension of K. [Note: the algebraic
                                                                          K(S \JT) = K(S)(T) CZ E(T) CZ K(S (J 7%F),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       case is trivial by Theorems V.l.ll and V.1.12.]
E(T) is algebraic over        U T). But F is algebraic over E(T) (Corollary 1.6) and
therefore algebraic over K(S U T) by Theorem V.1.13. Consequently, it suffices by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6.                                                    C of complex numbers over the field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (a) If S is a transcendence base of the field                                                                                                                                   Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of rationals, then S is infinite. [Hint: Show that if S is finite, then
Corollary 1.6 to show that S U T is algebraically independent over K.
    Let / be a polynomial over K in n + m variables (denoted for convenience                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \Q(S)\                   = |Q(*1,       .   .   .       ,   X n )\ = \Q[X U           .   .   .   ,   JtnJl        = |Q| < |C|
x u ..., x n ,y u     ym) such that f(s u      s n ,t u
                                                     .       m) =
                                                             .
                                                                    for some distinct
                                                                     .
                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                    .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          t


         j» e S,            eT. Let # = g(y u ...,ym )= f(su           ^,^1,    j>m) e                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (see Exercises 8.3                                      and 8.9 of the Introduction and Theorem 1.2). But Lemma
Ji,         .       .    .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •   ,                   .       .   ,



                                                        tm ) = 0, the algebraic inde-                                                                                                                                                                                                  V.3.5 implies |Q(5)|                                      = |C|.]
                 >g CZ E[y      ym
                                 .   .Since g(/i,
                                         .
                                             ,                                           l9   .       .       .       ,         ].                                        .   .       .       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (b)    There are infinitely many distinct automorphisms of the field C.
pendence of T over E implies that g = 0. Now / = f(xi,                  *n,.Vi,   ^m)                                                                                                                                    .   .   .   ,                   •   •   •   >


                r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (c)    tr.d.C/Q = |C|.
=       2
        i=i
                             hi(x u          •   .       .       ,       xn )fcOi,                •       •       •
                                                                                                                          ,   ym ) with /z s K[x u      t                         .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      x n ],       e K[y u •             •   •   ,   ^i- Hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7. If           F is algebraically closed and E an intermediate field such that tr.d.F/ K is
        = g(yu    ym ) = /(*,      ^n,^!,
                                     •   •  ym ) implies that h { (s u ...,s n ) =
                                             •   ,
                                                                                       for        •       •       •       ,
                                                                                                                                        .   .   •   ,                                                                                                                              finite,       then any ^-monomorphism F — F extends to a A'-automorphism of F.
every /. The algebraic independence of S over K implies that hi =       for all /, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8.    If Fis algebraically closed and tr.d.F/                                                              K is finite, then every A'-monomorphism
f(x u       x ny y u      ym ) = 0. Therefore 5 U T is algebraically independent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F — F is in fact an automorphism.
                         .   .   .                                   .       .   .
                                     ,                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              >
over K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u




318                                         CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                     2.       LINEAR DISJOINTNESS AND SEPARABILITY                                                                                                                  319




2.       LINEAR DISJOINTNESS AND SEPARABILITY                                                                                                              implies that u k                      + =^         a *i u i =              f° r every k <                  t.   This contradicts the linear inde-
                                                                                                                                                                                                    j t+i
         The chief purpose of this section is to extend the concept of separability to                                                                     pendence of X                         over K. Therefore                   X is linearly independent over E. m
(possibly) nonalgebraic field extensions. This more general concept of separability
will agree with                         our previous definition in the case of algebraic extensions (Theorem                                                    The following lemma and theorem provide some useful criteria for two fields to
2.8).        We first introduce the idea of linear disjointness and develop its basic properties                                                           be linearly disjoint.
(Theorems 2.2-2.7). Separability is defined in terms of linear disjointness and char-
acterized in several ways (Theorem 2.10). Other properties of separability are de-
veloped in the corollaries of Theorem 2.10.
         In the following discussion all fields are assumed to be subfields of some (fixed)                                                                Lemma 2.3. Let C be an algebraically closed field with subfields K,E,F such that
algebraically closed field C.                                                                                                                              K CZ E fl F. Let R be a subring ofE such that K(R) = E and K CZ R (which implies
                                                                                                                                                           that     R is a vector space over K). Then the following conditions are equivalent:
                                                                                                                                                                     (i)           E and F are linearly disjoint over K;
Definition 2.1. Let C be an algebraically closed field with subfields K,E,F such that                                                                               (ii)           every subset ofR that is linearly independent over                                                                     K is also linearly inde-
K C E fl F. E and F are linearly disjoint over K if every subset ofE which is linearly                                                                     pendent over F;
independent over K is also linearly independent over F.                                                                                                         (iii)              there exists a basis ofR over                               K which is linearly independent over F.

         REMARKS. An alternate definition in terms of tensor products is given in Ex-                                                                           REMARK. The lemma is true with somewhat weaker hypotheses (Exercise 2)
                           X of E is linearly independent over a subfield of C if and
ercise 1. Note that a subset
                                                                                                                                                           but this is all that we shall need.
only if every finite subset of A' is. Consequently, when proving linear disjointness, we
need only deal with finite linearly independent sets.
                                                                                                                                                              PROOF OF 2.3. (i) => (ii) and (i) => (iii) are trivial, (ii) => (i) Let = u   un                                                                    X                   {       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .   ,         \



                                                                                                                                                           be a finite subset of E which is linearly independent over K. We must show that A' is
         EXAMPLE. If K CZ E then E and K are trivially linearly disjoint over K. This
                                                                                                                                                           linearly independent over F. Since w t £                         E = K(R) each w is of the form w; = Cid~                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l

fact will be used in several proofs. Other less trivial examples appear in the theorems
                                                                                                                                                           = d/di, where c = f(r u                 x             .   .   .  ^ d = g (ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r ti ),   r    with r e R and fi,gi z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t   ;   l        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,       ti )               7
and exercises below.
                                                                                                                                                           K[x u      •    •(Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                   •
                                                                                                                                                                                       ,   xu]             2     V.1.3). Let d=did --dn and for each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /     v,                 let    =                                                                                         :




                                                                                                                                                                  -di^idt+i- -d z R. Then w = Vid~ and the subset X' — {vi,        i\] of R is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                                                           Cidi -
                                                                                                                                                                                                       rt                        t                                                                                .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,

         The wording of Definition 2.1 suggests that the definition of linear disjointness is
                                                                                                                                                           linearly independent over a subfield of C if and only if X is. By hypothesis X and
in fact symmetric in     E and F. We now prove this fact.                                                                                                  hence X' is linearly independent over K. Consequently, (ii) implies that X' is linearly
                                                                                                                                                           independent over F, whence X is linearly independent over F.
                                                                                                                                                              (iii) => (ii) Let U be a basis of R over K which is linearly independent over F. We

Theorem 2.2. Let C be an algebraically closed field with subfields K,E,F such that                                                                         must show that every finite subset X of R that is linearly independent over K is also
K C E (1 F. Then E and F are linearly disjoint over K if and only ifF and E are                                                                            linearly independent over F. Since X is finite, there is a finite subset U\ of U such that
linearly disjoint over K.                                                                                                                                  X is contained in the AT-subspace V of R spanned by U\ (note that Ui is a basis of V                                        \


                                                                                                                                                           over K). Let V\ be the vector space spanned by U\ over F. U and hence U\ is linearly
    PROOF. It suffices to assume E and F linearly disjoint and show that F and E are                                                                       independent over F by (iii). Therefore U\ is a basis of V\ over F and d\m K V — dinv^i.
linearly disjoint. SupposeX CZ F is linearly independent over K but not over E so                                               y
                                                                                                                                                           Now X is contained in some finite basis W of V over K (Theorem IV.2.4). Since W
that riUi + + r n u n = for some u z X and n z E not all zero. Choose a subset of
                            •   •   •
                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                           certainly spans Vi as a vector space over F, ^contains a basis                                                       W of V over F. Thus           x               Y




{
    ru   .   .   .
                     ,   r„ }   which is maximal with respect to linear independence over K; reindex if                                                    \Wi\      < W\ = dim A K = dinvKi =
                                                                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W   X \,   whence       W = Wu Therefore, the subset X
                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                           of   W     is           necessarily linearly independent over F.
necessary so that this set is {ri,r 2                             ,   .   .   .
                                                                                      ,   r t }(t         > 1). Then for each j > /, r =}      ^    a^ri

with ctij z K (Exercise IV. 2.1). After a harmless change of index we have:


                                                                                                                                                           Theorem 2.4. L<?/ C be an algebraically closed field with subfields K,E,L,F such that
                                             =
                                                 j   =i
                                                          r>u i   =       X
                                                                          j = i
                                                                                          rjUj        + = t+i (X)
                                                                                                           j  V=
                                                                                                                  <*ari )uj
                                                                                                                      i/                                   K CZ E andK CZ L CZ F. Then E and F are linearly disjoint over K if and only if(i) E
                                                                                                                                                           and L ar? linearly disjoint over K   (ii) EL and F are linearly disjoint over L.
                                             =   X        (       4-       X                      a ki u r*-
                                                                                                           J




Since £and Fare linearly disjoint, {r u                                                   .   .   .
                                                                                                      ,   r t \ is linearly independent over   F which          PROOF. The situation looks like this:
                                                                                              u




320                                        CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                      2.       LINEAR DISJOINTNESS AND SEPARABILITY                                                                                                                                                321


                                                                                          EF                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF. Every a e K is of the form a = v pn for some v e K ?*                                                                                                                                                                  11   1




                                                                                                                                                               (Exercise    5). For the first statement note that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = (a e K; m eX)                                                                            ^         a,-tf<                                            {




                                                                                                                                                               ^2
                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                        Vi
                                                                                                                                                                             pn
                                                                                                                                                                                  u   x
                                                                                                                                                                                          pn
                                                                                                                                                                                                  =           ( Vi £        K" pn and vS n = a )                                    t       ^                   ViUi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pTl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =                <^]£                                     = 0. For the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w Ui =                          (w{ e X 1 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00
                                                                                                                                                               second statement observe that if                                                                                         {                                                ;       w eAT), then for a large
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i   =i
                                                                                                                                                               enough n, w u                          .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w e^t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1/pn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .




                                                                               K                                                                               Theorem 2.7. Ler F be a field contained in an algebraically closed field C. IfF is a
                                                                                                                                                               purely transcendental extension of a fieldK of characteristic p 5^ 0,        F andK llpn
   (<=) If a subset X of E is linearly independent over K, thenX is linearly inde-                                                                             are linearly disjoint over K ./or all n > and F and K 1/p0°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are linearly disjoint over K.
pendent over L by (i). Therefore (since X   E EL) X is linearly independent over              C            d        f



F by (ii).                                                                                                                                                        PROOF. Let F = K(S) with 5 a transcendence base of F over K. If S = 0, then
      (=>) If          E and Fare linearly disjoint over K, then E and L are automatically linearly                                                            F = K and every linearly independent subset of F over K consists of exactly one
disjoint over K.                       To prove (ii) observe that EL = L(R), where R is the subring                                                            nonzero element of K. Such a nonzero singleton is clearly linearly independent over
L[E] of C generated by L and F. By Theorem V.l .3 every element of R is of the form                                                                            any subfield of C whence the theorem is true if S = 0. If S is not empty let       be the                                                                                                                                        M
f(e u  .  e n ) (<?i s E;feL[x u
           .   .
                   ,
                                 x„]). Therefore, any basis U of E over # spans R
                                                       .       .       .
                                                                           ,                                                                                   set of monomials over 5 (that is, the set of all finite products of elements of S). Then
considered as a vector space over L. Since E and L are linearly disjoint over K, U is                                                                          M   is linearly independent over K since S is algebraically independent over K. By

linearly independent over L. Hence                                                 U is a basis of R over L. But f/ is linearly inde-                          Theorem V.l. 3                                 M spans the subring K[S] (considered as a vector space over K).
pendent over F by the linear disjointness of Fand F. Therefore, EL and Fare linearly                                                                           Therefore,                         M   is a          basis of K[S] over K. The algebraic independence of S implies that
disjoint over L by                         Lemma 2.3.                                                                                                          for every n                        > 0, M pU = \m pn m e M\ is linearly independent over K. By Lemma 2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \




                                                                                                                                                               M        is linearly independent over                                                              K llpU for every n and hence over K                                                                    1/pCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .   Therefore, for
    Next we explore linear disjointness with respect to certain extension fields of K                                                                          each    < n < °° Fand K are linearly disjoint over K by Lemma 2.3 (with K[S],
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                llpTl


that will play an important part in the definition of separability.                                                                                            F, /C ^* in place of R, E, F respectively).
                                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                        The next theorem shows the connection between linear disjointness and separable
                                            K be a field ofcharacteristic p ^                                                                                  algebraic extensions and will motivate a definition of separability in the case of ar-
Definition 2.5. Let                                                                                                           and let C be an algebraically
closed field containing K. For each integer n >                                                                                                                bitrary (possibly nonalgebraic) extensions.


                         K » = {ueC u pn eK}.
                            ll     n
                                                           |




                         K   = |J Rl/p = U£C u pn g K for SQme
                            l/pco                                  n
                                                                                                                                      n > 0|
                               n >0
                                                                               j
                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 2.8. Let F be an algebraic extension field of a field K of characteristic
                                                                                                                                                               p    and C an algebraically closed field containing F. Then F is separable over K if
                                                                                                                                                               and only ifF and K 1/p are linearly disjoint over K.
     REMARKS. Since (w ± v) pn = u ± v in a field of characteristic p (Exercise     pJl            pTl



III. 1.11) each K
                  l/pn
                       is actually a field. Since K = K
                                                           1/p0
                                                                C K pU C              C K^ pCO for                               l'



all /2,m such that     < < w, follows readily that K
                                             /2
                                                              llpCO
                                                               it   is also a field. The fact that
                                                                                                                                                                        PROOF. We shall prove here only that separability implies that F and K llp are
                                                                                                                                                               linearly disjoint. The other half of the proof will be an easy consequence of a result
C is algebraically closed implies that K llpn is a splitting field over K of the set of poly-
             pn                                                                                                                                                below (see the Remarks after Theorem 2.10). Let A' = \u u     u n be a finite subset
nomials {x      - k k e K\ (Exercise 5). In particular, every k s K is of the form v                                                                     pTl                                                                                                                                                                                 .       .       .   ,        \



                                                                                                                                                               of F which is linearly independent over K. We must show that X is linearly inde-
                                       \




for some e K         Since #
                           llpTl                  1/?,r!
                   67             is a splitting field over K,
                                   .                               is essentially independent of                         it
                                                                                                                                                               pendent over K llp The subfield E = K(u u ...,«„) is finite dimensional over K
C (that is, another choice C would yield an isomorphic copy of K                     by Theorem                                           llpTl                                                                         .




V.3.8).
                                                                                                                                                               (Theorem V.l. 12) and has a basis u u     u n ,u n + u u r which contains ^(Theo-                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,               .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,            \

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r

                                                                                                                                                               rem, IV. 2.4). If v s E and k is a positive integer, then v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =            ^ ^ (^ ^0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      £         anc* hence

                                                                                                                                                                v p k
                                                                                                                                                                         =                        OiitiY           = ^tf/w                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -       Since v        is              separable over K, K(v)                                                    is          both separable
Lemma 2.6. IfF is an extension field of K of characteristic p ^ and C is an alge-                                                                                                         i


braically closed field containing F, then for any n > a subset X ofF is linearly inde-                                                                         algebraic and purely inseparable over K(v ) (Theorem V.6.4 and Lemma V.6.6),                                                             p

pendent over              K 1/pn if and only ifX pU =                                     {
                                                                                                  pM
                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                           u e X)       is    linearly independent over K.     whence K{v) = K(v») = K[v p (Theorems V.l .6 and V.6.2). Thus v is a linear com-              ]


Furthermore X is linearly independent over                                                    K    1/p0°
                                                                                                            ifand only ifX is linearly independent             bination of the v kp and hence of the u p Therefore E is spanned by (wi p    u r p \.                                {       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,



over   K
      1/pn
           for all n > 0.                                                                                                                                      Since [E K] = r, \u p        u r p must be a basis by Theorems IV.2.5 and IV.2.7.
                                                                                                                                                                                              :                                 Y   ,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,         \
                                                                                                                                   ;                                                      s                                                                                                                 5                                                                                                                                                       j




322                                    CHAPTER VI                                   THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                                                             2.                   LINEAR DISJOINTNESS AND SEPARABILITY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 323



Thus         .   .   .   ,   urp   ]   and hence Xv is linearly independent over K. By Lemma 2.6 A' is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5          shows that /(*) = d                                                                                                                          \JL                                                                                             with                                         ^ d e K[s u                                                                                                         s r ], v*                        = /r,-(ji,                                                                                  s r)
linearly independent over                    X 1/7 whence F and K 1,p are linearly disjoint over K. m
                                                                   ',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                                                                                            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                                                          and                   hi £ K[x u                                                      .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x r ].                                  Thus                                                                /i              =               ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i       =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^(xi,                        .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x T )x r+1 e K[x u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      * r+ i]                                                 and

Definition 2.9. Let F be an extension field ofK. A transcendence base S ofF over K
                                                                                                                                                                                      f(s u             .       .               .           ,       Wr+0 = 0. It follows that there exists a polynomial g e X[*i,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .           .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          * r +i] of
                                                                                                                                                                                      least                 positive degree such that g(s u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             j r+1 )                  = 0. Clearly g is irreducible in
is called a separating transcendence base ofF over   ifF is separable algebraic over                         K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,



                                                                                                                                                                                      K[x u      x r +i]. Recall that x { is said to occur in g(x^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x n ) if some nonzero term
K(S). IfF has a separating transcendence base over K, then F is said to be separably
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .           .           .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      of g contains a factor x t m with m > 1.
generated over K.
                                                                                                                                                                                          We claim that some a\- occurs in g with an exponent that is not divisible by p.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Otherwise g = c        Cimi(x u     x r+ i) p H       h c k m k (xi, x r+ i) p where c e X,           +                                                                                   .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                                                                                                                                               .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                                    ,                                                                               }

      REMARKS. Recall that F is algebraic over K(S) (Corollary 1.6). If Fis separably                                                                                                 the cy are not all zero, and each mj{x u        * r +i) is a monomial in *i,       av+i. Let                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       .                                                                                                                                                                                             .       .           .



generated over K, it is not true that every transcendence base of F over K is neces-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      m (x u                    .           .               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x r+ i) = 1a- and for each j >                                                                                                                                                                              choose                                                           e           K           1 ^'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         such that ^ p = Cj. Then
sarily a separating transcendence base (Exercise 8).
                                                                                                                                                                                      g =                                                               djirijixu                           •       •       •       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                * r +i)^ and g(si,                                                                                                              .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         j r+ i)                         =                                       imply that
      EXAMPLES.                    If Fis separable algebraic over K, then the null set is a separating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
transcendence base. Every purely transcendental extension                                                                         is   trivially         separably
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            djmj(su                                                                      Jr+i)                           = 0,
generated since F = K(S).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •       •       •   ,




   In order to make the principal theorem meaningful in the case of characteristic
                                                                                                                                                                                      whence the subset {m^Si,          ^+0 \j > 0) of Fis linearly dependent over K '?. But                                                                •       •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1



                                                           n
                                                             = # 1/0°° = K.                                  X               K^                                                       {mj(s u               > 0) is necessarily linearly independent over (otherwise there
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            , Jr+i) 17
zero we define (for any field K of characteristic 0)
                                                     1/0 =                                                                                                                                                              •           .           •




                                                                                                                                                                                      would exist a gi £ AT[xi,     x r+Y with deg gi < deg g and #i(si,    s r+ i) = 0). This                                              .           .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,                                               ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      fact contradicts the linear disjointness of F and K llp Therefore some x         say x u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                    t,


                                                                                                                                                                                      occurs in g with an exponent that is not divisible by p.
Theorem 2.10. IfF is an extension field of a field K of characteristic p >                                                                                 and C is                                The polynomial                                                                                                   g(x,s 2                                 ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s r +\) s K(s 2 ,        J r +i)M is necessarily nonzero.            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,



an algebraically closed field containing F, then the following conditions are equivalent.                                                                                             Otherwise, since xi occurs in g(x u                                                                                                                                                                                                       .x r+ \) by the previous paragraph, we could
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      obtain a polynomial g 2 £ K[x u                                                                                                                                                                                               •       •  -^r+i]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •   such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       < deg g2 < deg g and
         F and K 1/p are linearly disjoint over K;
       (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                      g'Asi,si,  j r+ i) = 0. Such a g 2    .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                                                                                                                                                           would contradict the choice of g. Therefore,
    (ii) F and K       are linearly disjoint over K for some n > 1
                 1/pn
                                                                                                                                                                                      g(x,5 2           ,       .               .           .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                j r+ .i)            ^ 0. Since g(ji,j                                                                                                   2,              .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,       s r+ i)                     = 0, 5i is algebraic over 7^(5                                                                                                                                                        2,              .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s r+ \).
   (iii) F and K       are linearly disjoint over K;
                 1/p0°
                                                                                                                                                                                      But j 2 ...           ,                                               ,       ^r+i are                        obviously algebraic over K(s 2                                                                                                                                                                           ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s r+ i) and                                                  £ is algebraic over
   (iv) every finitely generated intermediate field E is separably generated over K;                                                                                                  K(s u      j r+l ). By Theorems V.1.12 and V.1.13 E is algebraic over K(s 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .        .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                sy+i).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,           .        .          .



    (v) K and F are linearly disjoint over K, where K is the fixed field (relative to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      Since tr.d.F/ AT = r,    2    s r +i is a transcendence base of £ over K (Corollary 1 .7).                    {               ,           .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                           I

C and K) of AutKC                                                                                                                                                                        The proof of Theorem 1.2 shows that the assignment x \-> Si determines a /^-iso-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l




                                                                                                                                                                                      morphism      /C[x9,   A- r+   /C[5 2    j r+1 ]. Clearly extends to a AT-isomor- :                               .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,                           i]                  ^                                                   ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,


      REMARKS. The theorem is proved below. The implication (i) => (iv) provides a                                                                                                    phism K[x u x 2          x r+1 = K[x 2          x r+ i][xi]      X"^,        s r +i][x] such that .yi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,       a-                      ]                                                                           ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                        ^                                                           .       •       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                                                                                                                                H
proof of the second half of Theorem 2.8 as follows. For every u e F, K(u) is a finitely                                                                                               and ^(x 1?       x r+ i) |-> g(x,5 2     5 r+ i). Since   .    is an isomorphism, g(x,s 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                     j r+ i)                                                           ,           .           .           .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,                                                                        <t>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,

generated intermediate field and thus separably generated over K. But F (and hence                                                                                                    must be irreducible in K[s 2           Jr+i][.v]. Consequently g(x,s 2                  5 r+! ) is primitive                                                  ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,


K(u)) is assumed algebraic over                                                    K and the only transcendence base of an algebraic                                                  in K[s 2      Jr + i]M and hence irreducible in K(s 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,      by Lemma III. 6. 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,           .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,


extension    is      the null                  set.         Therefore K(u) is separable algebraic over K(0) = K.                                                                      and Theorem IIL6.14. Since           is an isomorphism a- must occur in g(x,s 2                         j r+ i)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                           ,


Hence every u e F is separable algebraic over K.                                                                                                                                      with an exponent not divisible by p. Thus the derivative of g(x,s 2                             sM   is non-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,       .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,


                                                                                                                                                                                      zero (Exercise III.6.3), whence g(x,s 2                 j r+1 ) is separable by Theorem III.6.10.                                                                                                                                                     ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,


     SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.10. Except in proving (iii) <=> (v) we shall assume                                                                                                         Therefore 5! is separable algebraic over K(s 2                   s r ^) and hence over K(s 2              s n ).                                                                                                                                                                          ,   .        .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                                                                                                    ,           .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,


that char K = p ^         since the case when char K =        is trivial otherwise, (iii)                                                                                             In           particular,                                                                  E = K(s u                                                       .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sn )                            is                   separable                                                       algebraic                                                                       over                                 K(s 2                       ,       .           .           .                   sn )                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,


(ii) ^>  (i) is immediate since K  '? <Z  K llpn
                                                 CZ K ^ for every  n>\.1                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                      Lemma V.6.6. Thus if |s                                                                                                                               2,          .           .           .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s n ] is                                a transcendence base of E ovei K, then E is
     (i) => (iv) Let E = K(s u        s n and tr.d.E/K = r. By Corollary 1.7 r < n and
                                                              .    .       .
                                                                               ,     )                                                                                                separably generated over K. If not, then                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  {           2,      .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,   j„|                             contains a transcendence base
some subset of \s u                    .   .   .
                                                   ,
                                                       sn \       is       a transcendence basis of E over K, say {s u                                     .   •   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                           sr ]   .
                                                                                                                                                                                      (Corollary                                                                    1.7),               which we                                                                        may assume (after                                                                                                                            reindexing                                                                                      if       necessary) to                                                                                                   be
If r= n, then \s u        sn   is trivially a separating transcendence base, whence (iv)
                                   .   .   .
                                               ,        \
                                                                                                                                                                                      {       2,   .   .        .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5 r+ i|.                            A repetition of the preceding argument (with si{i in place of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         j»          for
holds. If r < n, then s r+ is algebraic over K(s u i
                                                         s ) (Corollary 1.6) and therefore      .    .   .   ,   r
                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                                      /    = 1,2,                                   .           .           .       ,   r   +           1               and possibly more                                                                                                                                                   reindexing) shows                                                                                                                        that                             s2                  (and hence

                                                                                                                                                                             A        ^>2,             .        .           •                       s n ))                  is separable                                                                        algebraic over K(s^                                                                                                                                                                          j n ).                              Hence                                        E is separable
the root of an irreducible monic polynomial f(x) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .           .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                              0*** £ K(s\,   .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                           s r )[x].
                                                                                                                     t   =i                                                           algebraic over K(s 3                                                                                      ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,       sn )                        by Corollary V.6.8. Continuing this process we must
"least common denominator argument" such as that used in the proof of Theorem                                                                                                         eventually find                                                                           su              .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,           st              such that                                                                               E is separable algebraic over K(s +u                                                                                                                                                                                              t                               .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sn )
                                          CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS                                                                                                                                    2.      LINEAR DISJOINTNESS AND SEPARABILITY                                                                                              325
324


                                                                                                                                                                            Corollary 2.12. (Mac Lane's Criterion) IfF is an extension field of a fieldK andF is
and [s t+ u        •   •   •
                                ,   Sn\   is   a transcendence base of E over K. Therefore E is separably
                                                                                                                                                                            separably generated over K, then F is separable over K. Conversely, ifF is separable
generated over K.
                                          W be a finite subset of F that                                        linearly independent over K.                           We   and finitely generated over K, say F = K(ui,                                                                .                   u n ), then F is separably generated
   (iv) => (iii) Let
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .
                                                                                                       is                                                                                                                                                                                               ,


                                                                                                                                                                            over K. In fact some subset of                                                                                      a separating transcendence base ofF
must show that W is linearly independent over K                                                                      Let E = JC(W0- We nee d onl y
                                                                                                          1 '***.                                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ui,       .   .       .   ,   un   }       is

                                                                                                                                                                            over K.
show that E and K llpCO are linearly disjoint over K since this fact immediately implies              y



that    W     is linearly independent over                     £ has a separating tran-
                                                                       A1 '*   00
                                                                                    .       Since               is finite,

scendence base 5 over K by (iv). We shall prove the linear disjointness of £ and K
                                                                                     VpCO                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. The proof of (iv) =* (iii) =* (i) in Theorem 2.10 is valid
by applying Theorem 2.4 to the extensions    K  c A 1/p0
                                                         and A C  A(5)  C  £as  follows.                         °                                                          here with F = E since it uses only the fact that E is separably generated. The last two

A(5) and # 1/p0 are linearly disjoint over K by Theorem 2.7. Let * be a subset of E that
                               °                                                                                                                                            statements are consequences of the proof of (i) => (iv) in Theorem 2.10.

is linearly independent over K(S). Since E is separable algebraic over K(S), X is

linearly independent over K(S)  by the half of Theorem 2.8 already proved. There-
                                                               l/p


fore   X          independent over K(S) by Lemma 2.6. The last three sentences
           p is linearly                                                                                                                                                    Corollary 2.13. Let F be an extension field ofK and E an intermediate field.
form the heart of an inductive argument which shows that XT is linearly indepen-
dent over K(S) for all    m > 0; (note that (XpT p = XpT+x Hence X is linearly inde-            )                         ).
                                                                                                                                                                                    (i)         IfF is separable over K, then E is separable over K;
                          for all m >    by Lemma 2.6 again. Therefore Z is linearly
                                          VpTn                                                                                                                                     (ii)         ifF is separable over E and E is separable over K, then F is separable over K;
pendent over K(S)
                     K(S)      and  hence  over its subfield K
                                                    1/pCO
                                                                 K(S). We have proved                                           llpCO                                              (iii)        ifF is separable over K and E is algebraic over K, then F is separable over E.
independent over
                    K(S) are linearly disjoint over K(S). Consequently E and K
                                                                                                                                                               l/pco
that E and K
                               l/pCO                                                 are

linearly disjoint over K by Theorem 2.4.
                                                                                                                                                                                   REMARK, (iii) may be false if E is not algebraic over K (see Exercise 8).
        <=> (v). It suffices to prove that K = K
      (iii)                                             Let u e K If u is transcendental            llpCD
                                                                                                            .                            .




over K, then there exists v e C with y ^ a and v transcendental over K (for example,                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.13. (ii) Use Theorems 2.4 and 2.10. (iii) If char                                                                                                  JST


take v = u 2 ). The composition K(u)                                      ^ K(x) ^ A(y) (where the isomorphisms are                                                          = p 9^ 0, let X be a subset of F which is linearly independent over E. Extendi to a
given by Theorem V.1.5) is a A-isomorphism a such that a(u) = t?. We thus have                                                                                              basis U of F over E and let V be a basis of E over K. The proof of Theorem IV.2.16
1 = tr.d.KW/A = tr.d.K(u)/K = tr.d.A(y)/A. Theorem     1.11 (and Introduction,                                                                                              shows that UV = uv u s U,v s V) is a basis of F over K, whence UV is linearly inde-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                j       \




Lemma 8.9 if tr.d.C/K(u) is infinite) implies that \r.d.C/K(u) = tr.d.C/A(y). There-                                                                                        pendent over K p by separability. Lemma 2.6 implies that (UV) P = u p v p u s U,u s V\
                                                                                                                                                                                                           l/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                j              \




fore a extends to a ^-automorphism of C by Theorem 1.12. But a(u) = v 5* u, which                                                                                           is linearly independent over K. We claim furthermore that Vp is a basis of E over K.

contradicts the fact that u e                                 A   .   Therefore, w must be algebraic over                                                 K with irre-      For E is separable over K by (i). Consequently, the linear disjointness of E and K l/p
ducible polynomial fs K[x]. If v s C is another root of /, then there is a A-isomor-                                                                                        shows that V is linearly independent over K llp whence Vp is linearly independent                                   ,



phism r K(u)   :                    ^
                 K(v) such thatV(w) = y (Corollary V.1.9). An argument similar to                                                                                           over K by Lemma 2.6. Since E = KE p by Corollary V.6.9, Vp necessarily spans E
the one in the transcendental case shows that r extends to a ^-automorphism of C.                                                                                           over K. Therefore, V p is a basis of E over K. To complete the proof we must show that
Since     ueKwe must have u = t(u) = y, whence /has only one root in C. Thus « is                                                                                           X is linearly independent over E llp                                              .       If   ^ aM =                                 (en z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -     E llp ;u* e X C U), then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -




purely inseparable over K. If char                                      K = 0, then / (which                                        is       necessarily separable)                                                                                                                i



must have degree 1 Hence uzK = A          .    If char K = /? 5* 0, then
                                                                          1/oao
                                                                               e A for some
                                                                                        .                                                         W   n                            a pu p
                                                                                                                                                                                    l       l       = 0. Since each              a ps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x         E is of the form                                                    dM*         £   ^       ^? £       *0 we nave

n >       by Theorem V.6.4. Thus « e K llpn CZ K °. We have proved that K
                                                   VpC                                A 1/p0°.                                                               C                = 5^                      CijVj p )ui p   = 22 CijU p vj p The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t           .                            linear                       independence        of (UV) P implies
Conversely suppose        that char A: = p 9* 0, ^ e K l/pn
                                                              K llpCO
                                                                      and a e Aut*C    Then                          d                                                                  *           y                       hi
                         pn
                                         = a(u) pn - u pTl = (a(u) - u) pn and a(u) = u.                                                                                    that c l}           =       for all ij and hence that fl x                                     =            for all i. Therefore,^ is linearly inde-
a ( u )P = a ( u p ) = u
        n         n
                              whence            ,

                                                                                                                                                                            pendent over E llp
Therefore,             K       llpCD
                                        cA          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EXERCISES
Definition 2.11.                                extension field ¥ of a field                          K /j                           Z?^      separable over     K (or
                                                                                                                                                                                   Note. E and F are always extension fields of a field AT, and C is an algebraically
« separable extension ofK)ifF satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 2.10.
                                                                                                                                                                            closed field containing E and F.

                                                                                                                                                                             1 .    The subring E[F] generated by E and F is a vector space over K in the obvious
      REMARKS. Theorem 2.8 shows that this definition is compatible with our
previous use of the term "separable" in the case of algebraic extensions (Definition
                                                                                                                                                                                    way. The tensor product                           E®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K F is also a ^-vector space (see Theorem IV.5.5
                                                                                                                                                                 when               and Corollary IV.5.12). E and F are linearly disjoint over K if and only if the
                                                            condition of                Theorem                 2.10                 trivially satisfied
V.3.10).           Since the                   first

char K = 0, every extension field of characteristic                                                                  is
                                                                                                                               is

                                                                                                                          separable.
                                                                                                                                                                                    AMinear transformation                            E®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K F-*E[F] (given on generators of E(x)K F by
                                                                                                                                                                                   a® b\-+ ab)                  is   an isomorphism.

   The basic properties of separability are developed in the following corollaries of                                                                                        2.    Assume E and F are the quotient fields of integral domains R and S respectively.
Theorem 2.10.                                                                                                                                                                      Then C is an /^-module and an 5-module in the obvious way.
                                                                                                          .




326                                           CHAPTER VI THE STRUCTURE OF FIELDS

             F and F are linearly disjoint over K if and only if every subset of R that
           (a)
      is   linearly independent overK is also linearly independent over S.
        (b) Assume further that R is a vector space over K. Then E and F are linearly
      disjoint over K if and only if every basis of R over K is linearly independent
      over F.
           (c)   Assume that both R and 5 are vector spaces over K. Then E and F are
      linearly disjoint over                                K if and only if for every basis X of R over K and basis Y of
      5 over K, the set                         (
                                                    uv      |
                                                                u eX; v e K}   is   linearly independent over                                                                     CHAPTER VII
 3.   Use Exercise 1 to prove Theorem 2.2.

 4.   Use Exercise 1 and the associativity of the tensor product to prove Theorem 2.4.

 5. If char     K = p ^ 0, then
                                                                                                                                                                   LINEAR ALGEBRA
           (a) K v P is a field for every n > 0. See Exercise III. .11.
                    n
                                                                                                      1


           (b) K  '^ 1
                      is a field.

           (c) K p is a splitting field over K of {x
                    nl/                                  — k k e K]                       pTl
                                                                                                 \




 6. If ( wi,     .   .   .
                             ,
                                     «n   }   is algebraically independent                 over F, then F and K(u u   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                      u n ) are
      linearly disjoint over K.

 7. If     £ is a purely transcendental extension of K and F is algebraic over                                                        then E
      and F are linearly disjoint over K.

 8.   Let    K = ZP ,F = Zp (x), and £ = Zp(x p                                      ).
                                                                                                                                                  Linear algebra is an essential tool in many branches of mathematics and has wide
           (a)   F is separably generated and separable over K.
                                                                                                                                                  applications.A large part of the subject consists of the study of homomorphisms of
           (b)   E^F.                                                                                                                             (finitely generated) free   modules (in particular, linear transformations of finite di-
           (c) F is algebraic and purely inseparable over F.
                                                                                                                                                  mensional vector spaces). There is a crucial relationship between such homomor-
           (d) \x v is a transcendence base of F over K which is not a separating tran-
                             \
                                                                                                                                                  phisms and matrices (Section 1). The investigation of the connection between two
      scendence base.
                                                                                                                                                  matrices that represent the same homomorphism (relative to different bases) leads to
 9.   Let char K = p ^                                      and let u be transcendental over K. Suppose F is generated                            the concepts of equivalence and similarity of matrices (Sections 2 and 4). Certain
                                                                where i\ is a root of x — u b K(u)[x] for = 1,2, ...
                                                                                       pl
      over K by                  {
                                     u,v u v 2 ,    .   .
                                                             .( ,                                                 /                           .   important invariants of matrices under similarity are considered in Section 5. Deter-
      Then F is separable over K, but F is not separably generated over K.                                                                        minants of matrices (Section 3) are quite useful at several points in the discussion.
                                                                                                                                                     Since there is much interest in the applications of linear algebra, a great deal of
10. (a)      K is a perfect field if and only if every field extension of K is separable (see                                                     material of a calculational nature is included in this chapter. For many readers the
      Exercise V.6.13).
                                                                                                                                                  inclusion of such material will be well worth the burden of additional length. How-
      (b)(Mac Lane) Assume K is a perfect field, F is not perfect and xr.d.F/K = 1.                                                               ever, the chapter is so arranged that the reader who wishes only to cover the im-
      Then F is separably generated over K.                                                                                                       portant basic facts of the theory may do so in a relatively short time.      He need only
11.   F is purely inseparable over K if and only if the only A"-monomorphism F — C is                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                  omit those results labeled as propositions and observe the comments in the text as to
      the inclusion map.                                                                                                                          which material is needed in the sequel. The approximate interdependence of the
                                                                                                                                                  sections of this chapter is as follows:
12.   F and F are free over K if every subset X of F that is algebraically independent
      over K is also algebraically independent over F.
        (a) The definition is symmetric (that is, E and F are free over K if and only if
      F and F are free over K).
        (b) If F and F are linearly disjoint over K, then F and F are free over   Show
                                                                                                                                                                                            /i\
                                                                                                                                                                                           3-^4^-2
      by example that the converse is false.
           (c)

      over F.
           (d) If
                 If      E is separable over K and E and F are free over K, then FF is separable

                         E and F are free over K                         and both separable over K, then FF is separable
                                                                                                                                                                                            N
      over K.                                                                                                                                     As usual a broken arrow A         >   B indicates that an occasional result of Section A is
                                                                                                                                                  used in Section B, but that Section B is essentially independent of Section A.

                                                                                                                                                                                                327
328                                         CHAPTER VII          LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                     1.               MATRICES AND MAPS                                                                                                                      329


1.        MATRICES AND MAPS                                                                                        Theorem 1.2. Let R be a ring with identity. Let E be a free left R-module with a finite
                                                                                                                   basis of n elements and F a free left R-module with a finite basis of m elements. Let
          The basic properties of matrices are briefly reviewed. Then the all important rela-
tionship between matrices and homomorphisms of free modules is explored. Except
                                                                                                                   M be the                 left R-module of all n                                                   X m matrices over R. Then there is an isomorphism
                                                                                                                   of abelian groups:
in Theorem 1.1 all rings are assumed to have identity, but no other restrictions are
imposed. Except for the discussion of duality at the end of the section all of this                                                                                                                                  Hom R (E,¥) ^ M.
material is needed in the remainder of the chapter.
          Let R be a ring. An array of elements of the form
                                                                                                                   IfR is commutative this is an isomorphism of left R-modules.


                                                                                                                       PROOF. Let {u u          u n be a basis of E,   v\,      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                )                                                                     {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vm )        a basis of F and
                                                                                                                   / £ Hom R (E,F). There are elements r of R such that                                                           {j



                                                                                                                                                                                    f(ui)            = r u vi + r n v H                                     2                      h r lm vm                    \



                                                                                                                                                                                    f(u 2 ) = r 2 ivi                              +r v H              22   2                      h r 2m vm                    ;




with a u £ R,n rows (horizontal), and m columns (vertical), is called an n X m matrix
over R. An n X n matrix is called a square matrix. For brevity of notation an arbi-                                                                                                 f(u n ) = rn iVi                               + rn2 v H                2                      h r nm v m                   .




trary matrix is usually denoted by a capital letter, A,B,C or by (a {j ), which indicates
                                                                                                                   The r       {j       are uniquely determined since                                                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vx ,         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   vm \       is       a basis of F. Define a map
that the i-jth entry (row /, column j) is the element a i; £ R. Two n                  X m matrices (a )  i}
                                                                                                                   P   :   Hom R (E,F) —+ M by f\-+ A, where A is the n X m matrix (r                                                                                                                                               i; ).   It is easy to verify
and (bij) are equal if and only if a {j = bij in R for all ij. The elements a n ,a 22 ,a^,            .   -    .
                                                                                                                   that      an additive homomorphism. If /3(f) = 0, then f(ui) =
                                                                                                                                       is                                          for every basis
are said to form the main diagonal of the matrix (an). An n X n matrix with a i; =
                                                                                                                   element u { whence / = 0. Thus & is a monomorphism. Given a matrix (ri; ) £ M, de-
                                                                                                                                            ,

for all / 5* j is called a diagonal matrix. If R has an identity element, the identity
                                                                                                                   fine f :E—+Fby f(u ) = ruvi + r v +           + rim vm (i = 1,2, ... n). Since E is free,
                                                                                                                                                                        {                                                i2   2            •       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,

matrix /„ is the n X n diagonal matrix with \ R in each entry on the main diagonal;                                this uniquely determines / as an element of Hom R (E,F) by Theorem IV.2.1. By con-
that is, In = (8ij) where 8 is the Kronecker delta. The n X m matrices with all entries
                                                                                                                   struction (3(f) = (r j). Therefore (3 is surjective and hence an isomorphism. If R is
                                                                                                                                                                    {

         are called zero matrices. The set of all n X n matrices over R is denoted Mat n R.
                                                                                                                   commutative, then Hom R (E,F) is a left .R-module with (rf)(x) = r(f(x)) by the
The transpose of an n X m matrix A = (aij) is the m X n matrix A = (bij) (note             1

                                                                                                                   Remark after Theorem IV.4.8. It is easy to verify that                                                                                                                                           is           an /^-module isomor-
size!) such that bij= an for all                     /,/'.
                                                                                                                   phism.
    If A = (aij) and B = (bij) are n X m matrices, then the sum A -f B is defined to
be the n X m matrix (c ), where      =i}  -f bij. If A = (aij) is an m X n matrix and
                                                     <? i;


B = (bij) is an n X p matrix then the product AB is defined to be the m X p matrix                                      Let R,E,F and (3 be as in Theorem 1.2. The matrix of a homomorphism
                             n
                                                                                                                   /s Hom R (E,F) relative to the ordered bases U = {u^             un  of E and V =                                                                                                    .       ,           .


              where c tj =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \

                                                Multiplication is not commutative in general. If A = (a^)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,

(Cij)
                             ^a bik    kj   .

                                                                                                                   {vi,    . vm.of F is the n X m matrix (ri} ) = /3(f) as in the proof of Theorem 1.2.
                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                        ,       }



is       an n X m matrix and r e R, rA is the n X m matrix (ran) ar»d Ar is the n X m                              Thus the /th row of the matrix of / consists of the coefficients of / (u ) s F relative to                                                                                                                                   t



matrix (tf l;r); rln is called a scalar matrix.                                                                    the ordered basis                            {
                                                                                                                                                                    vu      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                        ,   vm ]         .       In the special case when E = Fand (/ =                                                                                             Fwe refer
                       AB is defined, then so is the product of transpose matrices
          If the matrix product                                                                                    to the matrix of the endomorphism / relative to the ordered basis U.

B A If R is commutative, then (AB) = B A This conclusion may be false if R is
     l    l
              .
                                                             1    l   l
                                                                          .




noncommutative (Exercise 1).
                                                                                                                       REMARK. Let E,F,fU,V be as in the previous paragraph. The image under /of
                                                                                                                   an arbitrary element of E may be conveniently calculated from the matrix A = (rl; )
                                                                                                                   of /as follows. If u = X1U1                                               +xu                 2   2 -\                              h x n u n zE(x l £ R), then
Theorem 1.1. IfR is a ring, then the set of all n X m matrices over R forms an
                                                                                                                                                                                    / n                              \                 n                                               n                / m
R-R bimodule under addition, with the n X m zero matrix as the additive identity.
Multiplication of matrices, when defined, is associative and distributive over addition.
                                                                                                                                                        /(«) = /( X) XiiM )
                                                                                                                                                                                 \i = i                              /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Xif(ui) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                XA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \j = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                njVj

For each n > 0, Mat n R is a ring. If R has an identity, so does Mat n R (namely the                                                                                            m / n                                         \                             m
identity matrix I„).
                                                                                                                                                                            j= l            \ =it                             /                         y= i

                                                                                                                                                    n
          PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                         where y, =
                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                                                                                                                    ^=  i
                                                                                                                                                                            Tnus ^ ^ is the 1 X n matrix (xi x 2                                                                                            •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x n ) and K is the 1 X m

   One of the important uses of matrices is in describing homomorphisms of free                                    matrix (>>i y 2                  •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                ym ), then F is precisely the matrix product XA. A' and K are some-
modules.                                                                                                           times called row vectors.
330                                CHAPTER VII                                        LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                          1.   MATRICES AND MAPS                                                 331



Theorem 1.3. Let R be a ring with identity and let E,F,G, be free left R-modules with                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.4. Let                                      <j>   :   Hom R (E,E) -» Mat n tf be the anti-
finite ordered bases U = Ui,      un
                                   {    V = jvi,
                                          .   .   .
                                                      ,
                                                       v m |, W = fwi,|
                                                                          ,   w p re-               .   .   .
                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                 .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   |
                                                                                                                                                                                           isomorphism that assigns to each map /its matrix relative to the given basis. Verify
                                                                                                                                                                                           that the map ^ Mat n R —> Ma\ n R op given by \p(A) = A is an anti-isomorphism of
           Iffe Homn(E,¥) has n X m matrix A (relative to bases U and V) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :
spectively.
                                                                                                                                                                                           rings. Then the composite map yp<t> Hom R (E,E) — > Mat n ^ op is an isomorphism of
g e //owr(F,G) has m X p matrix B (relative to bases V andW), then gf e //owr(E,G)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :



                                                                                                                                                                                           rings. The last statement of the theorem is a consequence of Theorem IV.2.4 and
has n X p matrix AB (relative to bases U and W).
                                                                                                                                                                                           Exercise III. 1.17.

      PROOF. If A = (r ) and B = (skj), then for each / = 1,2,
                              i}                                                                                                     .   .   .       ,   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Let R be a ring with identity and A e Mat n R. A is said to be invertible or non-
                               /   m              \                       m                                     m         / p                                \
                                                                                                                                                                                           singular if there exists B e Mat n R such that AB = In                                        = BA. The inverse matrix B, if
               gf<Mi)   =
                              \A-=1
                                        r^ v k )
                                                  /
                                                          =
                                                                      fc=l
                                                                          H            rxk g(v k)   = ]T rik [ ]T sk] w )
                                                                                                            k=l           \j'=l
                                                                                                                                                         }

                                                                                                                                                             /                             it   exists, is easily seen to be unique; it is usually denoted A~ l                                 Clearly B = A' is in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1



                                                                                                                                                                                           vertible and (A~ )~ l= A. The product AC of two invertible matrices is invertible with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l


                        = 1^ [1^ rik skJ )w                                   j
                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                           (AC)' = C~ A~ If A is an invertible matrix over a commutative ring, then so is its
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1       l           l

                            y= l   V=    l                    /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .



                                                                                                                                                                                           transpose and (A )~ l = (A" ) (Exercise 1).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l          1   1

                                                                                                                                         m
Therefore the matrix of gf relative to U and                                                 W has          i-jth        entry       ^               rik s k]        .       But this is       The matrix of a homomorphism of free /^-modules clearly depends on the choice
                                                                                                                                                                                           of (ordered) bases in both the domain and range. Consequently, it will be helpful to
precisely the z-yth entry of the matrix AB.                                                                                                                                                know the relationship between matrices that represent the same map relative to
                                                                                                                                                                                           different pairs of ordered bases.
   Let 7? be a ring with identity and E a free left /^-module with a finite basis U of n
elements. Then Uom R (E,E) is a ring with identity, where the product of maps /and g
is   simply the composite function fg                         :   E-^ E (Exercise IV. 1.7). We wish to note for                                                                            Lemma 1.5. Let R be a ring with identity and E,F free left R-modules with ordered
future reference the connection between the ring                                                        Hom R (E,E) and the matrix ring                                                    bases U,V respectively such that |U| = n = V|. Let A e Matn R. Then A is invertible if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |




MauR. If S and T are any rings, then a function 6 :S —* T is said to be an anti-                                                                                                           and only if A is the matrix of an isomorphism f E — F relative to U and V. In this      :    >

isomorphism if is an isomorphism of additive groups such that 6(sis ) — d(s*)6(si) for                                                           2                                         case A
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     is the matrix of f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           relative to V and U.
all SieS. The map Hom R (E,E)—> Mat n R which assigns to each fe Hom R (E,E) its

matrix (relative to U) is an anti-isomorphism of rings by Theorems 1.2 and 1.3. It                                                                                                            SKETCH OF PROOF. An ^-module homomorphism /: E-> F is an isomor-
would be convenient if Hom R (E,E) were actually isomorphic to some matrix ring. In                                                                                                        phism if and only if there exists an /^-module homomorphism f~ l F — > E such that                             :


order to show that this is indeed the case, we need a new concept.                                                                                                                                         U
                                                                                                                                                                                           f~ f =     and ff' 1 = \ F (see Theorem 1.2.3). Suppose /is an isomorphism with
                                                                                                                                                                                                l



    If R is a ring, then the opposite ring of R, denoted R op is the ring that has the same                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                           matrix A relative to U and V. Let B be the matrix of f~ l relative to V and U. Sche-
set of elements as R, the same addition as R, and multiplication ° given by                                                                                                                matically we have

                                                          a o b = ba,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       map:                                            y-i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
where ba is the product in R; (see Exercise III. 1.1 7). The map given by r\-> r is                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       module:                                     F         >E
clearly an anti-isomorphism R — > R op If A = (a i} ) and B = (b i}) are n X n matrices
                                                                  .




over R, then A and B may also be considered to be matrices over R° v Note that in                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       basis:            U                         V          U
                                                          n                                                                                                                                                                            matrix:               A                               B
Mat n 7?, AB = (dj) where              cv,    = 2^ tfiA?;                                    DLlt       m Mat„7? op AB = (d^), where
                                                                                                                                 ,



                                                                                                                                                                                           By Theorem 1.3 AB is the matrix of f~ lf = \ E relative to U. But In is clearly the
                                                  n                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                           matrix of \ E relative to U. Hence AB = In by the proof of Theorem 1.2. Similarly
                                                                                                                                                                                           BA = /n whence A is invertible and B = A~ The converse implication is left as
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                                                           an exercise.


Theorem 1.4. Let R be a ring with identity and E a free left R-module with a finite
basis of n elements. Then there is an isomorphism of rings:                                                                                                                                Theorem 1.6. Let R be a ring with identity. Let E and F be free left R-modules with
                                                                                                                                                                                           finite ordered bases   U and V respectively such that |U| = n, |V| = m. Let f e
                                       Hom R (E,E) ^ Afaf„(R°p).                                                                                                                           Hom R (E,F) have n X m matrix A relative to U and V. Then                  matrix B                           f^nXm
                                                                                                                                                                                           relative to another pair of ordered bases ofE and F if and only ifB = FAQ for some
In particular, this isomorphism exists for every n-dimensional vector space E over a
                                                                                                                                                                                           invertible matrices P and Q.
division ring R, in which case          R op is also a division ring.

      REMARK. The conclusion of Theorem                                                 1   .4 takes a              somewhat nicer form when R                                                      PROOF. (=>) IfB is the n X m matrix of/relative to the bases U ofE and V of
is   commutative, since in that case R = R op                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                           F, then \U'\   = n and V'\ = m. Let P be the n X n matrix of the identity map \ E rela-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \
332                                           CHAPTER VII           LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                           1.       MATRICES AND MAPS                                                                        333


tive to the ordered bases                     V and U. P   is      invertible by   Lemma 1.5. Similarly let Q be                                       We close this section with a discussion of right modules and duality.
the      m X m invertible matrix of F relative to V and V (note order). Schematically
                                                     1                                                                                                If   R is commutative, then the preceding results are equally valid for right R-
we have:                                                                                                                                           modules. There are important cases, however, in which R is not commutative (for
                                                                                                                                                   example, vector spaces over a division ring). In order to prove the analogue of
                                     map:                                                                                                          Theorem 1.3 for right modules in the noncommutative case it is necessary to define
                                                           \   E          f              \   F
                                     module:         E              >E         >F                >F                                                the matrix of a homomorphism somewhat differently.
                                                                                                                                                      Let R be a ring with identity and let E and F be free right /^-modules with finite
                                     basis:         U'               U          V                    V                                             ordered bases U = [u u                                                 and V = [ui
                                                                                                                                                                                             .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             un   )                                   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v m \ respectively.     The matrix of
                                     matrix:               P              A              Q                                                         the homomorphism fe                      Hom R (E,F) relative to U and V is defined to be the m X n
                                                                                                                                                   matrix (note size):
By Theorem 1.3 the matrix of /= \ F f\ E relative to                                    V and V              is       precisely PAQ.
Therefore B = PAQ by the proof of Theorem 1.2.                                                                                                                                                                               Sn                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '       •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             522      *




         (<=)   We are given U,V,fA as above and B = PAQ with P,Q invertible. Let
g E — E be the isomorphism with matrix P relative to U and h F — » F the iso-
     :      >                                                                                                     :



morphism with matrix Q~ relative to V (Lemma 1.5); If U = u u
                                               l
                                                                             ««| then                    )
                                                                                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                       ,   ,




#(£/) = j^(wi),      g(u n )\ is also an ordered basis of E and P is the matrix of \ E
                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Srn 2
                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ^^ml                "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SmnJ
relative to the ordered bases g(U) and U. Similarly Q~ is the matrix of \ F relative to
                                                                                    l


                                                  -1
the ordered bases h(V) and V, whence Q = ((2 )" is the matrix of 1^ relative to V
                                                                               1                                                                   where the s ll e R are uniquely determined by the equations:
and h(V) (Lemma 1.5). Schematically we have                                                                                                                                         f(Ui)            = ViSn + ^21 + VsSsi H                                                  h VmSml

                             map:                          \E              f             \ F

                             module:                 E              >E         >   F             >   F
                             basis:

                             matrix:
                                                   g(U)
                                                               PAQ    U            V                 h(V)                                                                           f(u n ) = ViSu

                                                                                                                                                   Thus the coefficients of f{u ) with respect to the ordered basis V form the y'th column
                                                                                                                                                                                                     }


                                                                                                                                                   of the m X n matrix (s iy ) of /(compare the proof of Theorem 1.2).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          + V S + V&n +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2   2n                                   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + Vm Smn   .




By Theorem 1 .3 the matrix of / = 1 F /l e relative to the ordered bases g(U) and h{V)                                                                   The action of / may be described in terms of matrices as follows. Let u — u\x +
is   PAQ = B. m                                                                                                                                    u 2x 2 +•
                                                                                                                                                               + UnXn (x £ R) be any element of E and let X be the n X 1 matrix (or
                                                                                                                                                               •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                    {




Corollary 1.7 Let R be a ring with identity and E a free left R-module with an
ordered basis        U offinite cardinality n. Let A be the n X n matrix offe Hom R (E,E)                                                          column vector)                                Let A be the matrix of / relative to the bases U and V. Then
relative to U.      Then f                    n X n matrix B relative to another ordered basis ofE if and
only ifB = PAP~ for some invertible matrix P.
                             1




         SKETCH OF PROOF. If£ = F,U = V,andU' = V in the proof of Theorem
1.6, then        Q = P~ by Lemma 1.5.
                                 l
                                                                                                                                                   f(u) = vxvi         +v   2 }'2   +   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                 + vm ym where >\     ,                   s       R and                                is   the   m X   1   matrix


         The preceding results motivate:
                                                                                                                                                   (column vector) AX.
                                                                                                                                                      The analogues of results 1.2-1.5 above are now easily proved, in particular,
Definition 1.8. Let R be a ring with identity. Two matrices A,B e Mat n R are said to
be similar // there exists an invertible matrix P such that B = PAP
                                                                    -1
                                                                        Two n X                                            .                   m
matrices C,D are said to be equivalent // there exists invertible matrices P and Q such
                                                                                                                                                   Theorem 1.9. Let R be a ring with identity and E,F free right R-modules with finite
that      D = PCQ.                                                                                                                                     U and V of cardinality n and m respectively. Let N be the right R-module of all
                                                                                                                                                   bases
                                                                                                                                                   m X n matrices over R.
   Theorem 1.6 and Corollary 1.7 may now be reworded in terms of equivalence
and similarity. Equivalence and similarity are each equivalence relations (Exercise 7)                                                                 (i) There is an isomorphism of abelian groups //owr(E,F)                                                                      ^ N, which         is an iso-

and will be studied in more detail in Sections 2 and 4.                                                                                            morphism of right R-modules ifR is commutative;
                                        =




334                                         CHAPTER VII                           LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                           2.       RANK AND EQUIVALENCE                                                 335



      (ii)    let    G be a free right R-module with a finite basis Wo/ cardinality p. //                                                                                    2.   A matrix (#»,) e Mat n /* is said to be
f e //0Wr(E,F) has          m X n matrix A (relative to U and V) and g e Homn(F,G) has                                                                                                                    (upper) triangular <=> an =                           for   j < /;
p X m matrix B (relative to V and W), then gf s Homn(E,G) has p X n matrix BA
                     U and W);                                                                                                                                                                            strictly triangular <=> « iy                  =       for   j <   i.
(relative to
      (iii)   there is an isomorphism of rings Hom^.(E,E)                                             = Mat R.                 n                                                  Prove that the set of all diagonal matrices is a subring of Mat n /? which is (ring)
                                                                                                                                                                                  isomorphic to R x          x •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   factors). Show that the set T of all triangular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •   •




      PROOF. Exercise; see Theorems 1.2-1.4. Note that for right modules (iii) is                                                                                                 matrices is a subring of Mat„/? and the set / of all strictly triangular matrices is

actually an isomorphism rather than an anti-isomorphism.                                                                                                                          an ideal in T. Identify the quotient ring T/I.

                                                                                                                                                                             3.   (a) The center of the ring Mat n                     R consists of all matrices of the form r/n where r is   ,


                                                                                                                                                                                  in the center of R. [Hint: every matrix in the center of Mat n                     R must commute with
Proposition 1.10. Let R be a ring with identity and f E — > F a homomorphism of                               :                                                                   each of the matrices B r s                    ,   where B has R in position (r,s) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r s    \                        elsewhere.]
finitely generated free left K-modules. IfA is the matrix of {relative to (ordered) bases                                                                                         (b)   The center of Mat n R is isomorphic to the center of R.
U and V, then A is also the matrix of the dual homomorphism f:F*—>E*c?/free right                                                                                            4.   The set of all m X n matrices over R is a free /^-module with a basis of mn ele-
R-modules relative to the dual bases V* and U*.
                                                                                                                                                                                  ments.

      REMARK. Dual maps and dual bases are defined in Theorems IV.4.10 and                                                                                                   5.   A matrix ,4 e Mat n R is symmetric if A = A and skew-symmetric if A = —A  1                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




           R is commutative (for example, a field) it is customary to consider the dual
I V.4. 1 1 . If
                                                                                                                                                                                     (a) If   A and B are [skew] symmetric, then A + B is [skew] symmetric.
M* of a left /^-module M as a left /^-module (with rm* = m*r for r e R, m* e M* as                                                                                                  (b) Let R be commutative. If A,B are symmetric, then AB is symmetric if and

usual). In this case the matrix of the dual map /is the transpose A (Exercise 8).
                                                                                                                                               1                                  only if AB = BA. Also show that for any matrix B e Mat„^, BBt and B + B are                                        l



                                                                                                                                                                                  symmetric and B — B is skew-symmetric.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t




      PROOF OF 1.10. Recall                              that     the               dual          basis            V* =               {vi* 9   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                               v m *}   of   6. If      is a division ring         and A,B e Mat n /? are such that                     = /n then AB = /n and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,


F* = Hom R (F,R) is determined by:                                                                                                                                                5 = y4 _1 [////if; use linear transformations.]
                                                                                                                                                                                              .




                                                     Vi*(vi)   = 5*j               (Kronecker delta; 1 < ij < m),                                                            7.   Similarity of matrices is an equivalence relation on Mat n JR. Equivalence of ma-
                                                                                                                                                                                  trices is an equivalence relation on the set of all                           m X n matrices over R.
and similarly for the dual basis U* =                                 {       u\              u n *} of E* (Theorem I V.4. 11). Ac-
cording to the definition of the matrix of a map of right /^-modules we must show                                                                                            8.   Let E,F be finite dimensional (left) vector spaces over a field and consider the dual
                                                                              n                                                                                                   spaces to be left vector spaces in the usual way. If A is the matrix of a linear trans-
that for each j = 1,2, ...                      ,   m,f(Vj*) =        ^            «,-*r,7,   where ,4 = (r^) is then X w matrix                                                  formation /     :   >   F, then A                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is   the matrix of the dual map /           :   F* —> E*.
of /: E — F relative to (/and K Since both sides of the preceding equation are maps
               >


E —> R, it suffices to check their action on each u k s U. By Theorem IV.4.10 we have:
                                                                              /    m          \               m
                    f(v *)(u k ) = Vj*(f(u k )) = v *[ ]T ntVt)
                          }                                       }
                                                                                                      =            r k tVj*(v )        t
                                                                                                                                           = rki       .                     2.   RANK AND EQUIVALENCE
                                                                              V=i             /           t   =\
                                                                                                                                                                                The main purpose of this section is to find necessary and sufficient conditions for
On the other hand,                                                                                                                                                           matrices over a division ring or a principal ideal domain to be equivalent. One such
                                                                                                                                                                             condition involves the concept of rank. In addition, useful sets of canonical forms for
                                      (X
                                      V     i           /
                                                                 =            X
                                                                              i=i
                                                                                       Ui*(uk)ra          = rkj        .                                                     such matrices are presented (Theorem 2.6 and Proposition 2.11). Finally, practical
                                                                                                                                                                             techniques are developed for finding these canonical forms and for calculating the
                                                                                                                                                                             inverse of an invertible matrix over a division ring. Applications to finitely generated
                                                                                                                                                                             abelian groups are considered in an appendix, which is not needed in the sequel.
                                                            EXERCISES
      A^o/^: All matrices are assumed to have entries in a ring                                                                    R with identity.
                                                                                                                                                                             Definition 2.1. Let f         :   E —» F be a linear transformation of(left) vector spaces over a
1.   Let R be commutative.                                                                                                                                                   division ring D. The rank off is the dimension oflmf and the nullity off is the dimen-

        (a) If the                matrix product            AB is defined, then so is the product B A and                                                      l   l
                                                                                                                                                                             sion of Ker f.

     (ABy = B A       l       l
                                  .




        (b) If A is invertible, then so is A    and (A )~ = (A' )         1               l       l                1       1
                                                                                                                               .                                                  REMARK. If /:£->F is as in Definition 2.1, then by Corollary IV.2.14,
        (c)    If   R is not commutative, then (a) and (b) may be false.                                                                                                     (rank /)    + (nullity /) = dim^ZT.
336                                                                          CHAPTER VII. LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.       RANK AND EQUIVALENCE                                                                                                                 337



      R is a ring with identity and n a positive integer, then R n will denote the free
      If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Therefore, /(/t *) = w t-* for                                 for / = r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /   = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,         m..       .   .   ,       r   and /(/ *) =      t                                    +               .   .   .   ,


/^-module R@- -® R(n summands). The standard (ordered) basis of R consists of
                                                                           n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Im /is spanned by f(Y*) and hence by {wi*,             u*\. Since {wi*,          u r *\ is a                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                    .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,


the elements £1 = (1*,0,       0), e = (0,U,0,       0),      e„ = (0,       0,1*).
                                                                             .       .   .
                                                                                              ,               2                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                .   .    .    ,                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,                                           subset of A'*, it is linearly independent in E*. Therefore {wi*,     u r *} is a basis of                                                          .   .   .   ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Im f whence rank f=r = rank /

Definition 2.2. The row space [resp. column space] ofan n X     m matrix A over a ring
R with identity is the submodule of the free left [resp. right] module Rm [resp. Rn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ]   Corollary 2.5. // A is an n X                                                         m matrix over a division ring D, then row rank
                                                                       m
generated by the rows [resp. columns] of A considered as elements ofR [resp. R
                                                                                 n
                                                                                    If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ].       A = column rank A.
R is a division ring, then the row rank [resp. column rank] of A is the dimension of
the row [resp. column] space of A.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF. Let / D n — D m be a linear transformation of left vector spaces with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :           >


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               matrix A relative to the standard bases. Then the dual map /of right vector spaces
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               also has matrix                           A (Proposition 1.10). By Theorem 2.3 and Proposition 2.4 row
Theorem 2.3. Let f E — F be a linear transformation of finite dimensional left
                                                                 :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rank A = rank / = rank /= column rank A.
[resp. right] vector spaces over a division ring D. If                                                                                                                         A is the matrix off relative to some
pair of ordered bases, then the rank off is equal to the row [resp. column] rank of A-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   REMARK. Corollary 2.5 immediately implies that row rank A = row rank A                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for any matrix A over a field.
      REMARK. "Row rank" is replaced by "column rank" in the case of right vector                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  In view of Corollary 2.5 we shall hereafter omit the adjectives "row" and
spaces because of the definition of the matrix of a map of right vector spaces (p. 333).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "column" and refer simply to the rank of a matrix over a division ring.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   In Theorem 2.6 below equivalent matrices over a division ring D will be char-
      PROOF OF 2.3. Let A be the n X m [resp. m X n] matrix of / relative to or-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               acterized in terms of rank and in terms of the following matrices. If m,n are
dered bases U =                                                                                       of E and V =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              is defined to be the n X m zero matrix. For each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,7n
                                                        {
                                                            uu   •   •   .
                                                                                 ,       un       \                                                            j
                                                                                                                                                                   vu      .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                               vm }          of F. Then under the usual                                                                                        positive integers, then £J
isomorphism F                                      = Dm given by ^ r v                                                 {       {       |-> (n,                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,   rm ) the elements /(wO,                                                                              .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   f(u n )       f (1 < r < min (n,m)), E"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              is defined to be the n X m matrix whose first r rows are
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the standard basis vectors si,         s r of D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m and whose remaining rows are zero:
                                           onto the rows [resp. columns] of A (considered as vectors in D m ). Since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,

are mapped
Im /is spanned by /(wi),                                                             .   .    .       ,/(w n ), Im / is isomorphic to the row [resp. column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'lie

space of A, whence the rank of /is equal to the row [resp. column] rank of A.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U
      We now digress briefly to prove that the row and column rank of a matrix over a
division ring are in fact equal. This fact, which is proved in Corollary 2.5, is not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m
essential for understanding the sequel since "row rank" is all that is actually used                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E:-           =&
hereafter.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hit).

Proposition 2.4. Any                                                         linear transformation f                     E — F of finite dimensional left                      :




vector spaces over a division ring                                                                        D has the same rank as its dual map f F* — E*.                                                                                                                               :                                                                                                                                                                                     0)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n,m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Clearly rank£r                                 = r. Furthermore if E?' m is the matrix of an /^-module homo-
      The dual map is defined in Theorem IV.4.10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               morphism / £-> F of free /^-modules, relative to bases
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :                                                                                                          {u u        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          un      )       of E and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0i,                   vm        of F, then
   PROOF OF 2.4. Let rank /= r.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f         •   •   •   ,         \

                                                                                                                                                   By Corollary IV.2.14                                                                               there                            is           a                basis

X = wi,   un
           |
              such that \u r+
                       .       .      un
                                       .  is
                                           ,
                                              a basis of Ker / and
                                                    \                                                             i,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                   ,           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yi    =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           =                                                        yv x)
{
 /(wi), f(u   is a basis of Im / Extend Yi to a basis Y =
               .   .       .
                                   ,               r) )
                                                           = /(wi),                                                                                                                                                                           {   /i                                            .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .       ,   tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         }0           if       i       = r+l,r + 2,. ..,«.
f(u \t r+u ... t m ] of F. Consider the dual bases X* of E* and Y* of F* (Theorem
      r                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               An immediate consequence of Theorem 1.6 and Theorem 2.6 below is that every
IV.4.11). Verify that for each / = 1,2,       /w,                                                                                      .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               linear transformation of finite dimensional vector spaces has this convenient form
                                                                                                                   '*( /                           = 5i;                   lf              7
                                                                                                                                                                                               =        X '   2                                       r;                                                                       for some pair of bases (Exercise 6).
                   f(t*)(u )                                = r *( f(u )) = 1                                     /,
                                                                                                                                       ')                                                                         '       '       '       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A set of canonical forms for an equivalence relation R on a set A' is a subset C of A'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               that consists of exactly one element from each equivalence class of R. In other words,
where 6 i; is the Kronecker delta. Consequently for each j = 1, 2,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for every x e                       X there is a unique c e C such that x is equivalent to c under R. We now
                                                                                                                  = u *(uj) if = 1,2,                                                                                                                                                                                          show that the matrices E n '™ form a set of canonical forms for the relation of equiva-
                                                            f^)=                                       \8ij
                                                                                                                  if
                                                                                                                                   t



                                                                                                                     / = r+lfr + 2f ... >|ff
                                                                                                                                             r                                     /                          .       .       .       ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lence on the set of all n X m matrices over a division ring.
                                                                                                                        :




338                                                                        CHAPTER VII                             LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                     2.       RANK AND EQUIVALENCE                                                                             339


Theorem 2.6. Let M be the set of all n X m matrices over a division ring D and let                                                                                                                                                 Corollary 2.9. Every n X n elementary matrix E over a ring R with identity is in-
A,B e M.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           vertible and its inverse is an elementary matrix.


         (i)    A is equivalent to E-^' if and only if rank A = r.                lu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that In may be obtained from E by performing a
        (ii)    A is equivalent to B if and only if rank A = rank B.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F is the elementary matrix obtained by per-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  single elementary row operation T. If
                                                                                 (r = 1,2, ..
                                                                           ,,n
        (iii)   The matrices E"                                                                                .   ,   min (n,m)) constitute a set of canonical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  forming T on /„, then FE = In by Theorem 2.8. Verify directly that EF = /„.
forms for the relation of equivalence on M.

    SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) A is the matrix of some linear transformation
/ D n — D m relative to some pair of bases by Theorem 1.2. If rank A = r, then
    :
                >                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Corollary 2.10. IfB is the matrix obtained from an n X m matrix A over a ring R
Corollary IV.2.14 implies that there exist bases U = u u                 un   of D n and                                                                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                     .       .   .   ,       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with identity by performing a finite sequence of elementary row and column operations                                                                             ,



V  = [v u    ,v m   of
                    .  D.
                         m such that
                                .    f(u ) =  i\ for
                                                  \
                                                        = 1,2,     r and    f(u ) =     for                {                            /                        .       .       .       ,                            {           then B is equivalent to A.
                                                                       m
/ = r + 1,          Clearly the matrix of / relative to U and K is E"'
                            .       .   .    ,   /i.                      Therefore A is                                                                                                                 .



                n m                                                                n ,m
equivalent to E / by Theorem 1.6. Conversely suppose A is equivalent to E               By                                                                                                                                r   .       PROOF. Since each row [column] operation used to obtain B from A is given by
Theorem 1 .6 there is a linear transformation g £>" — D such that /i is the matrix of                                           :           >
                                                                                                                                                 m                                                                                left [right]       multiplication by an appropriate elementary matrix (Theorem 2.8), we
                                      n m
g relative to one pair of bases and E / is the matrix of g relative to another pair of                                                                                                                                            have B = (Ep                   -   E^A^Fr       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F9 ) = FAQ with each E F an elementary matrix and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   {        7
                                                    n n
bases. Consequently, rank A = rank g = rank E/          = r by Theorem 2.3. (ii) and                                                                                                                                              P = Ep            Eu Q = Fi                    Fq P and Q are products of invertible matrices (Corollary
                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                                      .




(iii)    are consequences of (i).                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.9) and hence invertible.


   The following definition, theorem, and corollaries have a number of useful con-                                                                                                                                                    We now consider canonical forms under equivalence of matrices over a principal
sequences, including practical methods for constructing:                                                                                                                                                                          idealdomain R. The rank of a free module over R is a well-defined invariant by
          (i)   canonical forms under equivalence for matrices over a principal ideal do-                                                                                                                                         Corollary IV.2.12. Since every submodule of a free /^-module is free (Theorem
main (Proposition 2.11);
                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IV.6.1), we may define the rank of a homomorphism /     F of free /^-modules to                       :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            £—
                                                                                   n
                the canonical forms Er
                                    under equivalence for matrices over a division ring;                                                                                                                                          be the rank of Im /. Similarly the row rank of a matrix A over R is defined to be the
                                                                                       '


         (ii)

   (iii) the inverse of an  invertible matrix over a division ring (Proposition 2.12).                                                                                                                                            rank of the row space A (see Definition 2.2). The proof of Theorem 2.3 is easily seen
Proposition 2. 11 is used only in the proof of Proposition 4.9 below. The remainder of                                                                                                                                            to be valid here, whence the rank of a ma-p / of finitely generated free /^-modules is
the material    independent of Proposition 2.11 and is not needed in the sequel.
                                        is                                                                                                                                                                                        the row rank of any matrix of / relative to some pair of bases. Consequently, if A is
   We shall frequently consider the rows [resp. columns] of a given n X m matrix                                                                                                                                                  equivalent to a matrix B, then row rank A = row rank B. For A and B are matrices
over a ring R as being elements of R m [resp. R ]. We shall speak of adding a scalar                                                                                                                                                                                                             —
                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of the same homomorphism /      R n > R m relative to different pairs of bases by Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :



multiple of one row [resp. column] to another; for example,                                                                                                                                                                       rem 1 .6, whence row rank A = rank / = row rank B. Here is the analogue of Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rem 2.6 for matrices over a principal ideal domain.
                                r(a u a 2              ,   .   .   .
                                                                       ,
                                                                           am )   + (b u       .   .   .
                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                   b m ) = (ra      Y       + bu     .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                     ra m            + bm        ).




Definition 2.7. Let A be a matrix over a ring R with identity. Each of the follow /rig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Proposition 2.11. If A is an n X m matrix of rank r >                                                             over a principal ideal do-
is called an elementary row operation on A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  main R, then A is equivalent to a matrix of the form                                                                   where L is an r X r
          (i)   interchange two rows of A;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^
         (ii) left multiply                                    a row of A by a unit c e R;                                                                                                                                        diagonal matrix with nonzero diagonal entries di,                            .   .   .   ,       d r such that di          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d2   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dr   .   77z<?

        (iii)   for r s R and i ^ j, add r times row j to row i.                                                                                                                                                                  ideals (d^,        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d r ) in   R are uniquely determined by the equivalence class of A.
Elementary column operations on A are defined analogously (with left multiplication                                                                                                                                                   REMARKS. The proposition provides sets of canonical forms for the relation of
in (ii), (iii) replaced by right multiplication).     elementary (transformation)                                               AnnXn                                                                                             equivalence on the set of n X                            m matrices over a principal ideal domain (Exercise 5).
matrix is a matrix that is obtained by performing exactly one elementary row (or                                                                                                                                                  MR is actually a Euclidean domain, then the following proof together with Exercise 7
column) operation on the identity matrix I n                                                                                .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and Theorem 2.8 shows that the matrix                                                    may be obtained from A by a
Theorem 2.8. Let A be an n X m matrix over a ring R                      and let E n                                                                                     with identity                                            finite sequence of elementary row and column operations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ^
[resp. E m be the elementary matrix
                    ]
                                    obtained by performing an elementary  row [resp.
column] operation T on I n [resp. I m ]. Then E n A [resp. AE m                                                                                          ]           is the matrix obtained by                                       SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.11. (i) Recall that ajb £ R are associates if a                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b
performing the operation T on A.                                                                                                                                                                                                  and b    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a.   By Theorem III. 3. 2 a and b are associates if and only if a = bu with u a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  unit.   We say that c e R is a proper divisor of a e R if c                                  \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a and c is not an associate of a
        PROOF. Exercise.                                                                                                                                                                                                          (that is, aJf c). By a slight abuse of language we say that two proper divisors Ci and c 2
340                                                        CHAPTER VII                        LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                              2.     RANK AND EQUIVALENCE                                                                                                                                                   341



of an element a are distinct if ci and c 2 are not associates. Now R is a unique fac-                                                                                                           first row.  However since a 2 a u a 2 b and a^b, a 2 is a proper divisor of ai by (i). A 2 \              1




torization domain by Theorem III. 3.7. If a = p^p 2
                                                      2      n
                                                           p (a distinct irreducibles                                     .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                is   equivalent to A u and hence to A, by (ii) and Corollary 2.10.
                                                                                                                                              t


and each m > 0), then every divisor of a is an associate of an element of the form                                                                                                                 (vi) If a 2 divides every entry in the first row of A 2 then a sequence of elementary

  l  k2
p\ p 2   p\ with
          •    •   • < ki < m for each /. Consequently a nonzero element of R
                       l                                                                                                                                                                        column operations produces a matrix equivalent to A and of the same general form
has only finitely many distinct proper divisors.                                                                                                                                                as B above.

        (ii)                                                              common divisor.
                   If a and b are nonzero elements of R, let c be their greatest                                                                                                                      (vii) If a 2 fails to divide                                                             some entry k in the first row of A 2 then repeat (iii) and                                                        ,




By Definition III. 3. 10 and Theorem III. 3.1 1 there exist r,s e R such that ar + bs = c,                                                                                                      obtain a matrix A z which is equivalent to A and has first row (fl 3 ,0,0,                                                                                                                                                                .       .   .   ,    0) with az a

oil =   and c6i = 6, whence a r + b s = \ R and bai — ab = 0. Consequently the
                                                                      x                   x                                                       x
                                                                                                                                                                                                common divisor of a and k. Az may have nonzero entries in its first column. But  2


m X m matrix                                                                                                                                                                                    since ciz                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a 2 az  ,               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k and a>Jfk, az is a proper divisor of a 2 by (i). Furthermore, a 2 and az
                                                                                                                                                                                                are distinct proper divisors of a by (v). A z is equivalent to A 2                                x                                                                                                  ,       and hence to A, by (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                and Corollary 2.10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (viii)                           Since a\ has only finitely many distinct proper divisors, a finite number of
                                                                                                                                                                                                repetitions of (iii)-(vii)                                                           must yield a matrix C which is equivalent to A and has
                                                                                                                                                                                                the form

is invertible with             inverse



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C



If the first row of A is (a,b,an,                                 .       .   .
                                                                                  ,   aim), then A is equivalent to                                           AT = In AT, whose
first   row is (cfi,an,                .       .   •
                                                       ,   a\ m ). If the first column
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                      of A is (a,d,azu                        .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                              a nX y, then an
                                                                                                                                                                                                with s             x       * 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (ix) If si does not divide some c,-y, add row                                                                                        /'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to row 1                                 and repeat (iii)-(viii). The
analogous procedure yields an invertible matrix S such that A is equivalent to SA
and SA has first column O,0,a 3 i,        a n i) where e is the greatest common divisor of
                                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                                                                                                result is a matrix                                                      D that is equivalent to A, has the same general form as the matrix C
                                                                                      ,           9

                                                                                                                                                                                                above, and has for its (1,1) entry an element s 2 which is a common divisor of Si and
a and d. A matrix such as 5 or T is called a secondary matrix.
     (iii) Since A ^    a suitable sequence of row and column interchanges and multi-                                                                                                           dj and a proper divisor of s im
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (x) If s 2 does not divide every entry in £>, then a repetition of (ix) yields a matrix
plications on the right by secondary matrices changes A into a matrix A which has                                                                                              x

                                                                                                                                                                                                that is equivalent to A, has the same general form as C and has (1,1) entry s z such that
first row (fli,0,0,     0) with a, ^ 0. A is equivalent to A by (ii) and Corollary 2.10.
                           .   .   .
                                           ,                                                                                              Y

                                                                                                                                                                                                s-6 is a proper divisor of s 2  whence s 2 and s 3 are distinct proper divisors of si. Since
     (iv) If ai divides all entries in the first column of A h then a finite sequence of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                Si   has only finitely many distinct proper divisors, a finite number of repetitions of
elementary row operations produces a matrix B of the form
                                                                                                                                                                                                this process produces a matrix that is equivalent to A, has the same general form as
                                                                                                                                                                                                C, and has a (1,1) entry which divides all other entries of the matrix.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (xi)                     Use induction and (x) to show that A is equivalent to a diagonal matrix

                                                                                                                                                                                                     - (o                                                      as in the statement of the theorem. Since the rank of F is obviously
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                r,   the rank of A is r by Theorem 2.6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (xii)                            (uniqueness) Let A and F be as in (xi), with du                                                                                                   .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d   r,       the diagonal ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                                ments of L r Suppose M a matrix equivalent to A (so that rank M = and N a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                     is                                                                                                                                                                   r)           is


                                                                                                                                                                                                matrix equivalent to M of the form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          where L      an X diagonal matrix
which is equivalent to A u and hence to A, by Corollary 2.10.                                                                                                                                                                      ^                                                                                          jj^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is                       r                    r

                                                                                                                                                                                                with nonzero diagonal entries k { such that ki  k2      k T By Theorem 1.2 F is the                                                                     •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .

             does not divide some first column entry b of A u then a sequence of row
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \                   |




        (v) If
                                                                                                                                                                                                matrix of a homomorphism / R m > R n relative to bases {u u           u n of R n and              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  —                                                                                                      .    .    .          ,           )

and column interchanges and multiplications on the left by secondary matrices
                                                                                                                                                                                                {v u   . v m of R m Consequently, /(wt) = d v { for / = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .       .                           \             r and f(u ) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .    for                                                                                                            .       .   .

                                                                0)' with a 2 a common
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                                                                                                  x                                                                                  ,                                          x
changes A\ into a matrix A 2 which has first column (a 2 fifi,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     = r + 1,      whence Im f=Rd v ®---©Rdr D r
                                                                                                                                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                i                                              .       .   .       ,   /i,                                                l   l                                                          .           By                      the                      analogue for
divisor of a\ and b (see (ii)). Note that A 2 may well have many nonzero entries in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                modules of Corollary 1.8.1 R m /lm ^ RvJRd^                                               1,                      f          ©                                                  •    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ® Rv /Rd ® Rv                    r                   r   vr        r+l
                                                                                                                                                                                                ®      •       •           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ®               Rvn ss */(</,)                      ©      •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ® */(</ ® R ®       r)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -       -       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ® R (m summands;
      ^or typographical convenience we shall frequently write an n X 1 column vector as the                                                                                                     ^i \d2     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dr). Since F is equivalent to N by hypothesis, Theorem                                                                                                                             1 .6                implies that          N
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                      = {a\a y.
                                                                                                                                                                                                is   the matrix of / relative to a different pair of bases.                                                                                                             A repetition of the preceding
                           X n row vector; for example,
transpose of a 1                                                                                      (
                                                                                                      \a 2 /
                                                                                                              J                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                argument then shows that R m /\m f s R/(k,)                                                                                           ©         •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        © R/(k ®R®---@R                      r)
342                                                   CHAPTER VII                        LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                APPENDIX: ABELIAN GROUPS DEFINED BY GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                                                                                           343


(m summands; k \k2      -\kr). The structure Theorem IV.6.12 for modules over a
                                             \-   •                                                                                                                                                                                        f
                                     x                                                                                                                                                                                                         \   D
principal ideal domain implies that (</ ) = (k ) for i = 1 ,2, r.                                        .   .   .   ,
                                                                                f          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b2 \             bn

   A simplified version of the techniques used in the proof of Proposition 2.1 may                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B =
                                        m
be used to obtain the canonical form E?' of an n X m matrix A over a division ring
D. If A =                     = ££ ,m there is nothing to prove. If an is a nonzero entry in /I, then
                                         ,



interchanging rows / and 1 and columns j and 1 moves an to position (1,1). Multi-
                      -1
plying row 1 by a,-,-    yields a matrix with first row of the form (ljj,c 2 c m ). Sub-                                         ,   •   •   •       ,
                                                                                                                                                                       B is equivalent to A by Corollary 2.10. Assume inductively that there is a sequence of
tract suitable multiples of row                                         1   [resp. column 1]       from each subsequent row [resp.
                                                                                                                                                                       elementary column operations that changes A to a (necessarily equivalent) matrix
column] and obtain a matrix of the form:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /*-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ck\        •   •   •        c kk       •   •           c kn

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C=


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^Cnx       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C nk

If every c tJ             = 0, we are done. If some c ^ 0, then we may repeat the above proce-
                                                                                    tJ                                                                                 For some j > £, c kJ ?±  since otherwise row k would be a linear combination of
dure on the (n - 1) X (m - 1) submatrix (c tJ ). Since row [column] operations on                                                                                      rows 1,2,      k — 1. This would contradict the fact that rank C = rank A = n by
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .   .   .   ,


rows 2,     n [columns 2,
              .   .   .   ,  m] do not affect the first row or column, we obtain
                                                       .    .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                       Theorem 2.6. Interchange columns j and £, multiply the new column k by c k f l and
a matrix                                                                                                                                                               subtract a suitable multiple of column k from each of columns 1,2,         k — 1,                                                     .   .    .   ,



                                                                                                                                                                       k -f 1,     n. The result is a matrix D that is equivalent to A (Corollary 2.10):
                                                                                                                                                                                             .   .   .   ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dk +\ k+    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D=

                                                                                                        ,m
Continuing this process eventually yields the matrix E? for some r. By Corollary                                                                                                                                                                                dn k +l             '   *   '      dnn
                            m                          m
2.10 A is equivalent to £?'   whence r = rank A and E?' is the canonical form of A
                                                        ,



under equivalence by Theorem 2.6.                                                                                                                                      This completes the induction and shows that when k = n, A is changed to In by
   A modified version of the preceding technique gives a constructive method for                                                                                       a     finite              sequence of elementary column operations. Therefore by Theorem 2.8
finding the inverse of an invertible matrix, as is seen in the proof of:                                                                                               A(FiF2            -       -F ) = In with each F an elementary matrix. The matrix FiF2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         t                          t                        F is a two-                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t


                                                                                                                                                                       sided inverse of A by Exercise 1.7, whence A is invertible. Corollary 2.9 and the fact
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                       that A = Fr 1    -F2 l Fr l show that (i) => (iv). (iii) => (i) by Lemma 1.5 and Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •



Proposition 2.12. The following conditions on an n X n matrix A over a division                                                                                        rem 2.3. (iv) => (iii) by Corollary 2.9.
ring   D are equivalent:
        (i)   rank A = n;
                                                                                                                                                                          REMARK. The proof of (i) => (iii) shows that /i" 1 = Fi/v F< is the matrix ob-                                                 •




                                                                                                                                                                       tained by performing on In the same sequence of elementary column operations used
       (ii)A is equivalent to the identity matrix I n                                          ;

                                                                                                                                                                       to change A to /„. As a rule this is a more convenient way of computing inverses than
      (iii)A is invertible;
                                                                                                                                                                       the use of determinants (Section 3).
      (iv) A is the product of elementary transformation matrices.


                                                                                                                             n
      SKETCH OF PROOF, (i)                                                   (ii)   by Theorem 2.6 since ETn
                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                 = In            .       (0 => (iii)
The rows of any matrix of rank n are necessarily linearly independent (see Theorem
IV.2.5 and Definition 2.2.) Consequently, the first row of A = (a,-,-) is not the zero
                                                                                                                                                                       APPENDIX: ABELIAN GROUPS DEFINED BY GENERATORS
vector and aij ^   for some j. Interchange columns j and 1 and multiply the new
                                                                                                                                                                                 AND RELATIONS
column 1 by a\f Subtracting suitable multiples of column 1 from each succeeding
                                 Y
                                     .                                                                                                                                        An abelian group G is said to be the abelian group defined by the generators
column yields a matrix                                                                                                                                                 0i,   .   .   .   ,       a m (ai e G) and the relations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                     .




344                                                               CHAPTER VII                                                      LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                  APPENDIX: ABELIAN GROUPS DEFINED BY GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                                                                    345



                                                                  rntfi               +r a H              X2       2                                       h ri m a m                                    = 0,                                                                                             EXAMPLE. Determine the structure of the abelian group G defined by genera-
                                                                  ^2ifli                   +
                                                                                      4- r 22 a 2                                  •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                           + r2m a m = 0,                                                                                                                                                  + 9b + 9c = and 9a — 3b + 9c = 0. Let F be the free
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tors a,b,c and relations 3a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   abelian group Za + Zb + Zc and K the subgroup generated by bi = 3a + 9b + 9c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   and b 2 = 9a — 3b + 9c. Then G is isomorphic to F/K and we have the matrix

                                                                  r n lCll            + rn2 « 4                                                            h ^nm^m                                       = 0,                                                                                                                                           " -
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               G                           5).
(rl7 s Z) provided that G                                             ^
                             F/#, where F is the free abelian group on the set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We indicate below the various stages in the diagonalization of the matrix ^ by ele-
jtfi,      a m and K is the subgroup of F generated by 61 = r n a +
           .   .   .
                       ,             )                                + r lm a m                                                                                                                                                                 x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mentary operations; (sometimes several operations are performed in a single step).
b 2 = r2la x +    + r2m a m      b n = rn  +      + rnma m Note that the same
                                                                      ,   .   .           .
                                                                                                  ,                                        ^                         •           •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   At each stage we indicate the basis of F and the generators of K represented by the
symbol a denotes both an element of the group G and a basis element of the free
                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   given matrix; (this can be tricky; see Exercise 11).
abelian group F (see Theorem II. 1 1). This definition is consistent with the concept                     .




of generators and relations discussed in Section 1.9 (see Exercise 10).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Generators of K, expressed as
    The basic problem is to determine the structure of the abelian group G defined by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ordered basis of F
a given finite set of generators and relations. Since G is finitely generated, G is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           linear combinations of this basis

necessarily a direct sum of cyclic groups (Theorem II. 2.1). We shall now determine                                                                                                                                                                                                                (3              9         9\       a; b; c                                     b   = 3a + 9b + 9c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x




the orders of these cyclic summands.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \9      -3                9)                                                   b 2 = 9a - 3b + 9c
    Let G be the group defined by generators a          a m and relations        =                                                                               x,          •       •       .       ,                                               ^       j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (3                          9\     a   + 3b; b; c                              bi       = 3(a + 3b) + 9c
as above.                       We shall denote this situation by the n X m matrix A = fa,). The rows of                                                                                                                                                                                           \9      -30                 9J                                                 b 2 = 9(a+ 3b) - 30b + 9c
A represent the generators b u                                                 .          .   .
                                                                                                      ,   6 n of the subgroup                                                                            K relative to the ordered basis                                                           (3                          0\     a   + 3b + 3c; 6; c                         6i = 3(a + 36 + 3c)
{   tfi,   .   .   .
                       ,    am       j   of F. We claim that elementary row and column operations performed                                                                                                                                                                                        \9      -30           -18/                                                     6 = 9( + 36 + 3c) - 306 - 18c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
on A have the following effect.
         B = (so) is obtained from A by an elementary row operation, then the
           (i)         If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (3                          0\     a   + 36 + 3c; 6; c                         6i = 3(a + 36 + 3c)

elements Ci = sna +     + si m a m   c n = sn \a\ 4-
                                             x       + s Tim a m of F (that is, the
                                                      •   •   •
                                                                                                      ,   .    .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 •       •       •                                                                                 \0      -30           —18/                                                     b 2 - 36        x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = -306 - 18c
rows of B) generate the subgroup K. (Exercise 1 1 (a)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (3                   0\            a   + 36 + 3c; c; 6                         6i       = 3(a + 36 + 3c)
    (ii) If B = (sn) is obtained from A by an elementary column operation, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \0      18          30/                                                        -(6 2 - 360 = 18c + 306
there is an easily determined basis {a    a m ') of Fsuch that bi = snai + Si 2 a 2 +                          x   ,   .       .    .
                                                                                                                                               ,


•     •
           +       Si m    a m for every / (Exercise 1 1 (b), (c)).
                                 '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (3                  0\             a   + 36 + 3c; c + 6; 6                     6i       = 3(a + 36 + 3c)
          If   K 9^ 0, then by Proposition 2.11 and Exercise 7, A may be changed via a finite                                                                                                                                                                                                      \0      18          12/                                                        -6 + 36i = 18(c + 6)+ 126
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


sequence of elementary row and column operations, to a diagonal matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /3                  0\             a   + 36 + 3c; c + 6;                       ^ = 3(a + 36 + 3c)
                                                                              d       x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \0          6       12/            6   + (c + 6)                               -6 + 36i = 6(c + 6) + 12(26 + c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /3              0\                 a + 36 4- 3c; 56 4- 3c;                     61       = 3(a + 36 + 3c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \0      6       Oj                 26   +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c                                      -6 + 36i = 6(56 + 3c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Therefore            G ^ F//^ ^ Z/3Z                 © Z/6Z © Z/0Z ^ Z © Z © Z.               3       6          If v e   G is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   image of v 4- AT e F/AT under the isomorphism F/AT ^G, t hen G is the internal direct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sum of a cyclic subgroup of order three wi th generator a 4- 36 4- 3c, a cyclic sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   group of order s ix with generator 56 + 3c, and an infinite cyclic subgroup with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   generator 26              + c.

such that di ^                              for all / and dx                                  \
                                                                                                      d2 dz    \           \                           \
                                                                                                                                                           d In other words a finite sequence of
                                                                                                                                                            r.


elementary operations yields a basis                                                                                           .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                           u m of Fsuch that {d ui,d2 u 2
                                                                                                                                                                 \
                                                                                                                                                                                           du                                                x           ,       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,   T   T \                                                              EXERCISES
generates K. Consequently by Corollary 1.8.11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 .   Let /, g E — F, h E — F, £ F — G be linear transformations of left vector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :        >       :     >          :       >


                   G^F/K^ (ZKi ©•  ZKm )/(Zrfi«i ® •© Zd U ©                  ©                                                                                          •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r       r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ©•••©" 0)                                                    spaces over a division ring D with dim^F = dim^F = w, dim^G = p.
                        ^ Z/drZ © -©Z/iZ © Z/0 ©• •© Z/0                          •                                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rank (/+ g) < rank / 4- rank g.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rank (kh) < min rank /z, rank k
                        = z ©---©z, ©z©--.©z,    dl                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    {



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nullity kh < nullity /z 4- nullity k.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }




where the rank of (Z ©•                                           •
                                                                          •© Z) is m — r and di                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                             d2              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d (see Theorem II. 2. 6).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                     (d)     Rank / 4- rank g — n < rank                     ^ < min {rank                   /, rank g)
346                                                   CHAPTER VII                                      LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                    APPENDIX: ABELIAN GROUPS DEFINED BY GENERATORS AND RELATIONS                                                                                                                                                                   347



         (e)   Max {nullity g, nullity h\ < nullity hg.                                                                                                                                                       quences du                 .       .       .       ,   dT Show that S is a set of canonical forms under equivalence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




         (f)   If     m 9^ n, then (e) is false for h and k.                                                                                                                                                  for the set of all n                                        X m matrices over R.
 2.   Ann X m matrix A over a division ring D has an m X n left inverse B (that is,                                                                                                                      6.   (a) If      / E — F is a linear transformation of finite dimensional vector spaces
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :                   >

      BA = Im ) if and only if rank A = m. A has an m X n right inverse C (with                                                                                                                               over a division ring, then there exist bases                                                         {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       uu   .   .   .   ,   un   }     ofE and v u                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,       vm   }   of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {

      AC = In ) if and only if rank A = n.                                                                                                                                                                    F and an integer r (r < min (m,n)) such that f(iii) =                                                                                  i?»for / = 1,2,                               .       .       .       ,   r and

 3.   If (cti,c t-2-   •
                           -Cim) is a                 nonzero row of a matrix (c l; ), then its leading entry is a                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                              f(Ui) =  for / = r + 1,      n.                                        .   .   .   ,




      where / is the first integer such that c it ^ 0. A matrix C = (c iy ) over a division                                                                                                                   (b) State and prove a similar result for free modules of finite rank over a
      ring D is said to be in reduced row echelon form provided: (i) for some r >         the                                                                                                                 principal ideal domain [see Proposition 2.11].

      first r rows of C are nonzero (row vectors) and all other rows are zero; (ii) the

      leading entry of each nonzero row is \ D (iii) if c l3 = \ D is the leading entry of                         \
                                                                                                                                                                                                         7.   Let           be a Euclidean                                               domain with "degree function"                                                               :   R — {0} —>N
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Definition III.3.8). (For example, let R = Z).
      row i, then c kj = for all k ^ /; (iv) if c\ h ,c 2h   c r r are the leading entries of                              ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                           ,       j


      rows 1,2,        .   .   .
                                   ,
                                       r,       then/i < j 2 <                                     < jr.                                                                                                           (a) If   A =                                           is a 2         X 2 matrix over               then                 can be changed to a diagonal
         (a) If       C is in reduced row echelon form, then rank C is the number of nonzero                                                                                                                                                                         jj
                                                                                                                                                                                                              matrix D by a finite sequence of elementary row and column operations. [Hint:
      rows.
         (b) If A is any matrix over D, then A may be changed to a matrix in reduced
                                                                                                                                                                                                              If    a 5* 0, 6 5^ 0, then b = aq                                                            + r with r = 0, or r^0 and 0(r) < 0(a).
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Performing suitable elementary column operations yields:
      row echelon form by a finite sequence of elementary row operations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fa                              (a               b — aq\
 4. (a)      The system of n linear equations in m unknowns x over a field K                                                                           {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = la            r\               lr                a\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \c               d)~*\c                          d- cq)       \c           V                \*                c).
                                                          Q\\X\        + d\zX +        2
                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                   + Q\ m Xm = b\
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Since <f>(r) < 4>(a), repetitions of this argument change A to B =                                                                                                                                                with

                                                                                                                                                                                                              0(5)       < 0(a) if s 5* 0. If u 9^ 0, a similar argument with rows changes B to
                                                      a n iXi -f a n2 x 2                      +       •   •   •
                                                                                                                   + a nm xm = b n                                                                            C = (0                 *)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     with             ^                                         if ' 5* 0;          (and possibly                                        »v   5^ 0).                           Since

      has a (simultaneous) solution if and only if the matrix equation AX = B has a                                                                                                                           the degrees of the (1,1) entries are strictly decreasing, a repetition of these argu-
      solution X, where    is the n X m matrix (a^),     is the w X 1 column vector                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ments must yield a diagonal matrix D =                                                                                    after a finite number of steps.]
      Ovi-xv  -XmY and i? is the n X 1 column vector (bib 2 b n y.                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^^
      (b) If A u Bi are matrices obtained from A,B respectively by performing the                                                                                                                                  (b) If A is invertible, then A is a product of elementary matrices. [Hint: By (a)
      same sequence of elementary row operations on both A and B then A' is a solu-                                                                    x                       x                               and the proof of Corollary 2.10 D = PA Q with P,Q invertible, whence D is in-
      tion ofAX = B if and only if X is a solution of /JiA" = B\.
      (c) Let C be the n X (m + 1) matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                              vertible and                   du d2 are units in R. Thus                                                 =                                                                                                           USe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           j       )(o^
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Corollary 2.9.]
                                                                               <zn                             tfi™        bi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nX m secondary matrix (see the proof of Proposition 2.11) over a
                                                                                           •   •   •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c)    Every
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Euclidean domain is a product of elementary matrices.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         8.   (a)    An invertible matrix over a principal ideal domain is a product of elementary
                                                                           <a n i       -          -
                                                                                                               a nm        bn j                                                                               and secondary matrices.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b)    An invertible matrix over a Euclidean domain is a product of elementary
      Then AX = B has solution if and only if rank A = rank C. In this case the solu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                              matrices [see Exercise 7].
      tion is unique if and only if rank A = m. [Hint: use (b) and Exercise 3.]
      (d) The system AX = B is homogeneous if B is the zero column vector. A
                                                                                                                                                                                                         9.   Let «i, n 2   ,    .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n h n be positive integers such that                                               m+« +              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + n = n and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t

      homogeneous system AX = B has a nontrivial solution (that is, not all x = 0)                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                              for each / let                     M be an n X n matrix. Let M be the n X n matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x                   {                {

      if and only if rank A < m (in particular, if n < m).


      Let R be a principal ideal domain. For each positive integer r and sequence of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M                  f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x




      nonzero ideals h     I2                    3
                                      l r choose a sequence du     3   •   •   •
                                                                                   3
                                                                      dr e R such that                                                                         .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M                                        2



      (J ) = I and
         y
                  j    d2      dT For a given pair of positive integers (n,m), let S be
                                            I
                                                  \
                                                      •    •   •
                                                                   |
                                                                           .




                                                                                                                       r
      the set of all n X m matrices of the form
                                                                                                                   ^main where =
                                                                                                                               q^,                         r           1 ,2,       ...   ,   min (n,m)

      and L r is an r X r diagonal matrix with                                                                                     diagonal one of the chosen se-
                                                                                                                                                                      .




348                                                                         CHAPTER VII                                                                       LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.                  DETERMINANTS                                                                                                        349


      where the main diagonal of each Af lies on the main diagonal of M. For each                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                                         terial is not needed in the sequel. Throughout this section all rings are commutative
      permutation a of 1 ,2,     t\    is similar to the matrix{                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                     ,               ,       M                                                                                                                                                                                                                      with identity and all modules are unitary.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            If       B is an i?-module and n > 1                                                                                                       an           integer,                  B n will denote the i?-module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B@B@                        -   •       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                @B{n summands). Of course, the underlying set of the module Bn is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    just the cartesian product B                                                                 X       •       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X B.
                                                          aM =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Definition 3.1. Let Bi,                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B n and C be modules over a commutative ring R with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    identity.               A function f                                    :   Bi       X       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X B n —> C is said to be R-multilinear if for each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i   = 1,2,          .   .       .       ,   n and all x$ e R, bj e Bj andhy e Bii
                                                                                                                                                                          /0                                  In\                                                                                                                  /0          In\
      [Hint:                 If       /   = 3,                     <r       = (13), and P = (                                                                                                 /nj                                     j,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      then P" 1 = (                                                                         /n2           j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              and                   f(bi,       .       .   .   ,   bi_i,rb                 + sb',b i+                       i,          .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b n ) = rf(bi,                    .      .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   bi_i,b,b i+ i,     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bn) +
                                                                                                                                                                          Vni                                     0/                                                                                                               V»,                0/                                                                                                                                                                            sf(bi,        .   .       .   ,   bi-i.b'.bi+i, . . . , b n ).
      PMP~ = crM. In the general case adapt the proof of results 2.8-2.10.]
                         l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IfC = R, then f is called an n-linear or R-multilinear form. // C = R and Bi = B 2
10.   Given the set a u          and the words w u w2       mv (on the a ), let F* be the
                                                               .    .    .
                                                                                 ,       an              }                                                                                                        ,           .       .       .       ,                                                                            f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =    = B n = B, then f is called an R-multilinear form on B.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M
                                                  {                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •




      free (nonabelian multiplicative) group on the set \a u       a n and let     be the                                                                                                                                                                          .       •       .       ,                   \



      normal subgroup generated by the words w u w 2i        wr (see Section 1.9). Let TV                                                                                                                                         .       .       .       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The 2-linear functions are usually called bilinear (see Theorem IV.5.6). Let B and
      be the normal subgroup generated by all words of the form aia^a^af
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




         (a) F*/M is the group defined by generators {a u             a n and relations                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,               ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C be /^-modules and / B n — C an /^-multilinear function. Then /is said to be sym-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :                >


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    metric if
      {
           = H> =
          h>i         = w = e\ (Definition 1.9.4).
                                 2
                                          •   •       •
                                                                        r

            F*/N is the free abelian group on \a u
           (b)                                            a n (see Exercise II. 1.12).                                                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f{b aU                  .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b an ) = f(b u                                   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bn )       for every permutation a sS„,
        (c) F*/(M V N) is (in multiplicative notation) the abelian group defined by

      generators \a u ...,a n and relations w = w =          = w = e\ (see p. 343).                                                                                                                                                                   •        •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and skew-symmetric if
                                                                                         )                                                                                {           Y                                       2

        (d) There are group epimorphisms F* — F*/N        F*/(M V N).                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b an ) = (sgn <r)f(b u                                                                          bn )              for every             a e S„.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f(b aU          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,




11.   Let F be a free abelian group with basis a u                                                                                                                            {
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .       am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .     Let K be the subgroup of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /is said to be alternating if
      F generated by bi = r n a -\     h ri^a™,                                                      Y                                                                            .   .           .       ,       b n = rni ai H     h rnm a m (rl; e Z).
           (a)       For each /, both {b u                                                                       •       •   .       ,                                                                    .       .       .           ,bn                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   and                                                 .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   ,   6t_iA          + rb,,                                            f(b u ...,b n ) =                                                    whenever                                           bi      = bj                  for some              /   ^ j.
      h+u        •   •       •
                                 ,
                                     bn   \
                                              (reZ;/Vy) generate K. [See Lemma II. 1.5.]
           (b)       For each / a u                        {
                                                                             .       .           .       ,
                                                                                                            — ai,ai+u                                                         .   .       .       ,       an              )       is a basis                                                   of F relative to which                                                   EXAMPLE. Let B be the free tf-module R © R and let d B X B -> R be de-                                                                                                                                     :



      bj = r n ai H                                        h ry,,-_ifl t                             -_i — r {—a) +                      ji                   l                   r/,,-+ifl,-+i                                               +•'••+ ryTO flm                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H ^11022 — 012 02i. Then d is a skew-symmetric alternating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    fined by ((an,fli 2 ),(02i,fl22))
        (c) For each / and j =^ / a u
                                                                                 ;



                                                                                                                     {
                                                                                                                                         .    .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              - rau a j+u                                                              .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       am          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (r s Z) is a basis                       bilinear form on B. If one thinks of the elements of B as rows of 2 X 2 matrices over
      of F relative to which 6* = r*i0i                                                                                                   + + rk.i-iQi-i + (^i + /r*,)^ +
                                                                                                                                                      •   •       •                                                                                                                                                                         r^,i + ifl 1+ i    +    R, then d is simply the ordinary determinant function.
                h rA .,-_ifly_i                           + /^(a, - ra                                                       t   )       + ^.y+i^j+i H  h rAm a m                                                                                                                      .




12.   Determine the structure of the abelian group G defined by generators [a,b] and
      relations 2a + 4b =    and 36 = 0. Do the same for the group with generators                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Theorem 3.2. //B and C are modules over a commutative ring R with identity, then
      {a,b,c,d\ and relations 2a + 3b = 4a = 5c +        = and for the group with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   every alternating R-multilinear function f B n —* C is skew-symmetric.                                                                                  :




      generators \a,b,c,d,e\ and relations
      la  _ 76 + 14</ _ 21c = 0; 5a - 76 - 2c + lOd - 15c = 0; 3a - 3b - 2c +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF. In the special case when n = 2 and                                                                                                                                                        <r   = (1 2), we have:
      6</ - 9c = 0; a - 6 + 2d - 3e = 0}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = f(bi + b A + b ) = f(bM + f(b u b ) + f(b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2          + f(b ,b )        2                                                                                    2                   2   M                      2       2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = + f(b u b ) + f(b    + 0,                                                                                      2                         2   M
3.    DETERMINANTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  whence f(b 2 ,bi) = -f(b u b 2 ) = (sgn a) f(b u b 2 )- In the general case, show that it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    suffices to assume a is a transposition. Then the proof is an easy generalization of

      The determinant function Mat n R -+ Ris defined as a particular kind of ^-multi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the case n = 2.

linear function and its elementary properties are developed (Theorem 3.5). The re-
mainder of the section is devoted to techniques for calculating determinants and the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Our chief interest is in alternating /t-linear forms on the free .R-module R n Such a                                                                                                                                                         .



connection between determinants and invertibility. With minor exceptions this ma-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   form is a function from (R n ) n = R n @- -0 R n (n summands) to R.                                                                                 •
350                                                                                                                    CHAPTER VII                                           LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.               DETERMINANTS                                                                                                    351



Theorem 3.3. IfR is a commutative ring with identity and r e R, then there exists a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Since Xi =                X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2,   a^i — ,. 2<r i, and a 2 <r2 = #1*2, whence the summand corresponding to
unique alternating R-multilinear form f (R n ) n — R such that f(£i,£ 2    £ n ) = r,                                                                                        :                                                                                                                                 ,       .   .           .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the odd permutation ap is:
                                             n
where {si,      £n is the standard basis ofR      .       .   .       ,       }                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         — ra\ V p\a p az ap z'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2<J   2                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -Onapn               = — rau^a^ia^z                                                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •   -anan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           — — /"^I<rl^2<r2^3<r3                                           '   *   '   anan   .



          REMARK. The standard basis is defined after Definition 2.1. The following
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thus the summands of f(Xu XlyX3                                                              ,Xn ) cancel pairwise and
facts may be helpful in understanding the proof. Since the elements of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R n may be                                                                                                             ,       .       .   .




identified with 1                                                         X n row vectors, it is clear that there is an /^-module isomorphism                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f(Xu X ,X3 ,...,Xn ) = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l

(Rny                  ^ Mat R given by (XUX                   n                                                                            2,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                    Xn H A, where A is the matrix with rows
                                                                                                                                                                             )             >

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Therefore /is alternating.
XU X          2,          .       .       .       ,
                                                      Xn If {ei,  .                                .       .   .
                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                           en )        is       the standard basis of R n then (si,£ 2                                                                ,                                                    ,       .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e„) |-> /„

under this isomorphism. Thus the multilinear form /of Theorem 3.3 may be thought
of as a function whose n arguments are the rows of n X n matrices.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We can now use Theorem 3.3 and the Remark following it to define determinants.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     In particular, we shall frequently identify Mat n R and (R n ) n under the isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (given in the Remark), which maps (ei,      e„)|-> /„. Consequently, a multilinear                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


    PROOF OF 3.3. (Uniqueness) If such an alternating /j-linear form / exists and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    form on Mat„R is an /^-multilinear form on (R n ) n whose arguments are the rows of
if (Xu  Xn ) e (R n) n then for each there exist a e R such that A; = (an,a
                          .       .
                                      .       ,
                                                                              a )             ,                                                         /                                                          {j                                                                                                                  i2 ,            .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   ,    in       n X n matrices considered as elements of R n                                                                      .

              n
= ^2 a £y. (In other words, under the isomorphism (/? n ) n ^ Mat n R, (Xu
                                      i;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .       .       .       ,Xn )\->
      3       =1
(an).) Therefore by multilinearity,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Definition 3.4. Let R be a commutative ring with identity. The unique alternating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^-multilinear form d                      :   Mat n R — R such that d(I n ) = 1r is called the determinant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >

                                                      f(Xu                                    ,Xn ) = f(%2 a lh e h ^2 a 2j2 e k                                                                                                             ,2               fl n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n £, n )
                                                                          .       .   .


                                                                                                                                           jl
                                                                                                                                                                        ,

                                                                                                                                                                                 31.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       .    .   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     function on Mat n R. The determinant of a matrix                      A e Mat n R is the element d(A) £ R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and is denoted |A|.
                                                                                                                       — ^2^2                           '   '
                                                                                                                                                                '^2 a\h a 2n'                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a ni n f( e hi e i2i                               •       •   •   >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           £ j'J-
                                                                                                                                  3i           h                        3n



Since /is alternating the only possible nonzero terms in the final sum are those where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Theorem 3.5. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and A,B £ Mat n R.
jijz,   Jn are all distinct; that is, {j u Jn] is simply the set 1,2,                                                                                               .   .    •                                                                                                 {                       .   .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n] in some
order, so that for some permutation a eS n (ju          ,jn ) = (crl,                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .       .   .                                                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an).                            Conse-                           (i)    Every alternating R-multilinear form f on Mat n R is a unique scalar multiple of
quently by Theorem 3.2,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the determinant function d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (ii)    If A = (aij), then \A\                          = ^2 ( s8n <r)*u&2<r2'                                                      •       -a nff n.
                                                                  f(X\,                   .    .       .       ,Xn ) = ^2 a Ul a 2<r2'                                                 '       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                   tfn<rn/(£<rl,£<r2,                                     •    •       •       ,   £<rn)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (iii)   |AB|            = |A||B|.
                                                                                                                               = ^2 ( s 8 n <r)aw                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •«n«rn/(£l,£2,                                  •       •       •       ,       £«)•                                                                                    (iv)    If A is invert ible in Mat n R, then \A\ is a unit in R.
                                                                                                                                           aeSn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (v)    // A and B are similar, then \A\ = |B|.
Since f(e u ...,£„) = r, we have                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (vi)    |A*|        = |A|.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               If A = (aij) is triangular, then |Al = ana 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (vii)                                             -a nn                                                                         -       •


                                                                                      f(Xu                         .   .   .   ,Xn ) = ^2 ( s 8 n v)rauia 2 <,2'                                                                             •    -a n<Tn                  .                                                                                               (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (viii) IfBis obtained by interchanging two rows [columns] of A, then \B\ = — |A|.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     //B is obtained by multiplying one row [column] of A by r £ R, then |B| = r| A|. //B is
Equation (1) shows that f(Xu                                                                                                           .   .    .       ,Xn ) is uniquely determined by Xu                                                                                                                     .       .       .       ,Xn and r.                                    obtained by adding a scalar multiple ofrow i [column i] to row] [column j] (i ^ j), then
                                                     (R n ) n -+ R by formula (1) (where
          (Existence) It suffices to define a function /                                                                                                                                                            :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |B|   = |A|.
Xi  = (a iu        a in )) and verify that / is an alternating /2-linear form with
                                                  .       .   .
                                                                      ,



/(£i,       £ n) =.r. Since for each fixed k every summand of ^2 ( s 8 n <r) ra
                          .       .
                                          ,
                                                                                     a ™*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SKETCH OF PROOF. (i)Let/(/n ) = r iR. Let d be the determinant function.
contains exactly one factor a i3                                                                                                           with / = k, it follows easily that /is /^-multilinear.                                                                                                                                                                                    Verify that the function rd                               :   Mat n R -* R given by A[^ r\A\ = rd(A) is also an
                                                          n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /= rd by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     alternating ^-multilinear form on Mai n R such that rd(In ) = r, whence
Since £                       t       = ^2 &,•£,• (Kronecker delta), f(e u                                                                                                             .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   en)               = r. Finally we must show that                                                                                                                  uniqueness statement of Theorem 3.3. The uniqueness of r follows immediately.
                                                      3   =1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ii) is simply a restatement of equation (1) in the proof of Theorem 3.3. (iii)
f(Xu                  .       .       .       ,Xn ) =
                                         = X, and i ^ y. Assume for convenience of notation that
                                                                                      if Xi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Let B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be fixed and denote the columns of B by YU Y2          Yn If C is any n X m matrix with
/   =         1       J = 2. If p = (12), then the map -> S„ given by a \-> ap is an injective func-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,               .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rows Xu                   ,Xn       then the (/,;) entry of CB is precisely the element (1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X matrix)
tion whose image is the set of all odd permutations (since a even implies ap odd and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .       .         ,                                                                                                                                                            1


\A n = |5n |/2). ThusSn is a union of mutually disjoint pairs a,ap] with a £ A n If                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     XJj.      Thus            the CB is (X^X^,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fth       row of X,Yn Use this fact to                                                                    .       .   .                       ).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     verify that the map Mat„i? — R given by C\—\CB\ is an alternating ^-multilinear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cr                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
          \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {


even, then the summand of f(Xu Xu X          ,Xn ) corresponding to a is                                                                                        3,      .    .    .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     form /on Mat n R. By (i) / = rd for some r e R. Consequently, \CB\ = f(C) = rd(C)
                                                                                                                                           +        /*fll<rlfl2<r2fl3<r3                           *   '       '   a n<Tn            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     = r\C\. In particular, \B\ = \In B\ = r\In = r, whence \AB\ = r\A\ = \A\\B\.                  \
352                                                                              CHAPTER VII                                                                                      LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.           DETERMINANTS                                                                                                                                                                                                 353



             (iv)         AA~ = In implies \A\\A~ = \AA~ = \In = 1 by (iii). Hence \A\ isaunit
                                       l                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                             \
                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                          \                         \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and for each j = 1 ,2,                                         .           .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n,

in R with \A\~* = \A-*\. (v) Similarly, B = PAF~ implies \B\
                                                l
                                                                            = \P\\A\\P\~ = \A\                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l                                                                                                                                                             n

since                     is       commutative.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \a\          = Z(-iy+,fl.-,H-,-i-
             (vi)         Let A = (a i7 ). If /i,
                                  U are the integers 1,2,        n in some order, then                   .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .       .       .    ,



since                     is commutative       a in n may be written as ai h ai h
                                                                             any product a^a^
                                                                                  a n n If                                                                                                    •       •                                                                                                       •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The first [second] formula for \A\ is called the expansion of |A| along row i
  is the permutation such that a(k) = i k9 then a' is the permutation such that
<j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                           [column j].

a~ (k) = j k Furthermore, it is easy to see that for any azS n sgn a = sgn <j-\ Let
         l
                                   .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,



A = (6 ); then since 5„ is a group,
     t
                      17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROOF OF 3.6. We let j be fixed and prove the second statement. By Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.3       and Definition 3.4 it suffices to show that the map                                                                                                                                                                      <t>          :       Mat n /? — R given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n


                                                              =          S                       (S 8                n 0-" l )«l<r _1                                             l   •       *       -fln^n =                                  \A\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A =         WhZ (-1)^,1^1=i  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is          an alternating                                                                     R -multilinear form                                                                           such that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <t>iJn)                  Xn be the rows of A. If Xk = X with 1 < k < t < n then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \r. Let Xi ...         9                           9                                                                                                                                               t                                                                                         9



        By hypothesis either a{j = for all j < i or a l7
             (vii)                                          for all j > i. In either                                                                                                                                                                            =                                                                                   \Aij\= for / ^ k,t since it is the determinant of a matrix with two identical rows.
case show that if a eSn and o- ^ (1), then aw        = 0, whence                                                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Since A kj may be obtained from A by interchanging row t successively with rows                                     tj

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t -\   ... k + \,\Aki\ = (-D              by Theorem 3.5. Thus <i>(A)^(-\) k ^\A kj
                                                                 \A\             =            ^
                                                                                              <reSn
                                                                                                                     (Sgn 0")fli«rl-                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                                                                  'flnffn                      = #11^22                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "   "flnn-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f (-\y+i\A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (-\y+i+t-k-i\ Aij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tj   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +  (_iy+i\  At = o. Hence         is alternating. If                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for some k Xk = rYk + s\Vk9 let B = (6 ) and C = (c ) be the matrices with rows                                                              i7                                                                l7

             (viii)        Let         X   l9
                                                .    .       .
                                                                 ,
                                                                     X    i9
                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                     X,,                 .       .           .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                          X be the rows of A. If 5 has rows X
                                                                                                                                                                                  n                                                                                                                                   l9   .   .       .   X   j9   X ... Xn -uYk ,Xk +i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l9         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Xn and Xu         Xk -i lVk9 Xk+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9   .      Xn respectively. To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,               ,                                         .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9                   9                                        i   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .    .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9


.    .   .
             9
                 X   i9   .    .   .
                                       9
                                           X
                                           n9       then since dis skew-symmetric by Theorem 3.2,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   prove that    is /^-multilinear we need only show that <t>(A) — r<t>(B) + s<t>(C). If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             </>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    / = k  then \A kj = \B k] = \Ck] whence a k] \A kj = (rb k] + sc k] )\A kj = rb kj \B kj +
                                                    |£|              = d{Xu ... X ... X ... Xn )                                     9               j9                               9               i9                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9                          \                                   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \   9                                                                         \                                                                                    \                                              \




                                                                     = -d{X ... X ... X ... Xn) = -\A\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sc k j\C k] \. If /          ^             then since each \A {j is a multilinear function of the rows of A^ and             \




                                                                                                                 l9                                                      i9
                                                                                                                                                     9                                            9                   j9                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a*/       = bn = dj for / ^ we have « |A = fl»y(r|B + 5|C |) = /A;|5 + 5c |C                                        t7               7 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 3-|                                       l7                                  t7   |                            l7               t7 |.


Similarly if B has rowsXi,                                                                       .       .       .
                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                 X ...   i9                                   ,   rXi                 +                   A',-, ...,*„ then since                                                     is multilinear                                It follows that <t>(A)    = r</>(5) + 50(C); hence is R -multilinear. Obviously </>(/„) =                                                                                 </>



and alternating                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 R.      Therefore, <t> is the determinant function. The                                                                                                                                              first                   statement of the theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    follows readily through the use of transposes.
                     |£|       = d(Xu                                                                                        rXi                 + *y, ... X                                                      9        n)

                               = rd(X               l9       .   .   .
                                                                         9
                                                                                 X       i9          .       .       .
                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                 X       i9          ,*n + d(Xu
                                                                                                                                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  )                                         .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X           i9   .   .   .    .   .   .   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Xn       )


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposition 3.7. If A = (aij) is an n X n matrix over a commutative ring R with

The other statement is proved similarly; use (v) for the corresponding statements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    identity andA a = (bij) is the n X n matrix with bij = (— l) i+j |Aji|, then AA a = |A|I„
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = A a A. Furthermore A is invert ible in Mat n R if and only if\A\ is a unit jn R, in
about columns.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    which case A -1 = |A| -1 A a                                                       .




             If R is a field, then the last part of Theorem 3.5 provides a method of calculating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The matrix A a is called the classical adjoint of A. Note that if R is a field, then A\
    Use elementary row and column operations to change A into a diagonal matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \


\A\.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is a unit if and only if \A\ ^ 0.
B = (6l7 ), keeping track at each stage (via (viii)) of what happens to \A\. By (viii),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
\B\ = r\A\ for some     ^ r e R. Hence r\A\ = b n b 2 2- Kn by (vii) and                                                                                                                                                                    •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PROOF OF 3.7. The (/,;) entry of AA                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is a,-                   =                                   (-\) i+k a ik \A jk                                  \.        If / = j,
                                                                                                                                     \A\                         = r' b n             l
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -       •   -b nn     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k = i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    then ca = \A\ by Proposition 3.6. If / ^ j (say < j) and ^ has rows Xu      Xn9 let                                                                                           /                                                                                                         .        .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9


   More generally the determinant of an a? X a? matrix A over any commutative ring                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5 = (bn) be the matrix with rows X                       Xj-i X Xj+i     Xn Then                                                                 l9       .       .       .                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9                            9       i9             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




with identity may be calculated as follows. For each pair (ij) let A l} be the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         = a lk = ^ and|^ ^| = \B ]k for all k\ in particular,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ^tA:                             7fc                       = since the determinant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7                                        \                                                                                                          |Z?|

(n           - 1) X (n - 1) matrix obtained by deleting row                                                                                                                                                                                     /       and column j from A. Then                                                                   is    an alternating form. Hence
\Aa\             e   R is called the minor of A = ( aii ) at position (ij) and (- l) t+ 'H,! e * is called                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n                                                                                                 n
the cofactor of <z 17                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 di =          Z (-l)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i+k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oik\A ik              \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         =        Z (-1)^|5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A:      =1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7 ,|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = |5| = 0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Therefore, <? l7 == 5 l7 M| (Kronecker delta) and AA a = \A\In In particular, the last                                                                                                                                                      .




    Proposition 3.6. // A is an n X                                                                                                              n matrix over a commutative ring                                                                                                                R with identity,                                   statement holds with A in place of A A (A ) a = \A \In Since (A a ) = (A ) a we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l                l                                    l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                    l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \A\In = \A'\In = A (A Y = A (A a Y = (A a A)\ whence A a A = (\A\In )< = \A\L. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l           l                                   l



then for each i                                 = 1 ,2,                      .   .       .
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                         n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    if \A\ is a unit in R, \A\~ A a z Mat n i? and clearly (\A\~ A a )A = In = A(\A\~ A a).    l                                                                                                                                       l                                                                                  l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hence     is invertible with (necessarily unique) inverse A~ = \A\~ A a Conversely if                                                                                                                                          l                                   l

                                                                                                                      |A|                    =                   Z (-D^IA-,!                                                                                                                                                                        A is invertible, then \A\ is a unit by Theorem 3.5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                         u




354                                                               CHAPTER VII.                           LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                            4.     DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION                                                                          355



Corollary 3.8. (Cramer s Rule) Let A = (aij) be the matrix of coefficients of the                                                                                                                                                                                   anXi H      h a in x n   =
system of n linear equations in n unknowns

                                                                      anXi          + ai x + 2   2
                                                                                                         •   •   -
                                                                                                                         + ainX           n   = bi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a n \X\ H   h a„ n x n =

                                                                                                                                                                                                               and that A = (a 17 ) is the n X n matrix of coefficients. Then A\bi =                                                          for every /.
                                                                                                                         h a nn x n = b n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \



                                                                      a„iXi         +a x H  n2   2                                                                                                             [Hint: If B{                    is       the n X n diagonal matrix with diagonal entries                        R    1IrA,,    .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,




                                                          ^ 0, then the system has a unique solution which is given by:                                                                                        Ik,     .   .   .        la, then |/4Zy          = \A\b To show that \AB =                         add £ ; times column j of
over a field K.                             If \A\                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                                   {.                       { \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to column / for every j 9^ i. The resulting matrix has determinant \AB{                                                             \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   and
                                                        = A           -1
                                                                                          (-l) ifi bi|Aii|)                               j   = 1,2,       .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                           n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (&,/) entry akibi                        + ^2 H           h      —    for & = 1,2                          /?.]
                                                          l       !


                                                                              (|3

     PROOF. Clearly the given system has a solution if and only if the matrix equa-
tion  AX = B has a solution, where X and B are the column vectors X = Ur-                                                                                                                                 4.   DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION
B = (bi -b n y. Since \A\ ^ 0, A is invertible by Proposition 3.7, whence X = A~ B
             -    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                  l            AND SIMILARITY
is a solution. It is the unique solution since AY = B implies Y = A~ B. To obtain the
                                                                                                                                                                            l

                                                                                                                                                                                                             The structure of a finite dimensional vector space E over a field K relative to a
formula for x simply compute, using the equation
                                    }                                                                                                                                                                     linear transformation E —> E is investigated. The linear transformation induces a de-
                                                        X = A B = {\A\~ A*)B = \A\-\A°B).
                                                                                l                    l                                                                                                    composition of E as a direct sum of certain subspaces and associates with each such
                                                                                                                                                                                                          decomposition of E a set of polynomial invariants in K[x] (Theorem 4.2). These sets
                                                                                                                                                                                                          of polynomial invariants enable one to choose various bases of E relative to each of
                                                                                           EXERCISES                                                                                                      which the matrix of the given linear transformation is of a certain type (Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.6). This leads to several different sets of canonical forms for the relation of similar-
      Note: Unless stated otherwise all matrices have entries in a commutative ring R
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ity in   Mat n K (Corollary 4.7).
with identity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Note.               The results of this section depend heavily on the structure theorems for
                                                for all nonzero r s R, then prove that an n-linear form B -> R is
                                                                                                         n
1.    If r   + r ?±                                                                                                                                                                                       finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain (Section IV.6).
      alternating if and only if it is skew-symmetric. What if char R = 2?                                                                                                                                     Let         ^ be a field and <}>\E—>E a linear transformation of an //-dimensional
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^-vector space E. We first recall some facts about the structure of Y\om K (E,E) and
2. (a)       If       m > then every alternating ^-multilinear form
                                         az,                                 )                                                                             on (R n m is zero.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mat n ^T. Hom K (E,E) is not only a ring with identity (Exercise IV. 1.7), but also a
      (b) If          m < n, then there is a nonzero alternating ^-multilinear form on (R n )m                                                                                                        .


                                                                                                                                                                                                          vector space over                             K with (k\p)(u) = k\p(u) (k s K,u e E,\f/ e Hom^^E)); see the Re-
      Use Exercise 2 to prove directly that if there is an i?-module isomorphism                                                                                                                          mark after Theorem IV.4.8). Therefore if / =                               ^ kx        {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is a   polynomial in K[x], then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZW
3.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {


      R m ^ R n then m = n.    ,                                                                                                                                                                          /(*) =                               is   a well-defined element of       Hom A-(£,£) (where                     <t>°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = Ie as usual).
                                                                                          n~l
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Similarly the ring                             Mat n # is also a vector space over K. If A e Mat„#,                                                   then
4. If   A s Mat n #, then \A a = \A\                                      \
                                                                                                 and (^          a a
                                                                                                                  )          = \A\"~ A.       2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =                    kiA { is a well-defined n X n matrix over K (with A                               = In ).
5.    If /? is a field and A,B e Mat n                                                    R are invertible then the matrix A + rB is invertible
      for all but a finite number of r e R.

6.    Let /4 be an n X n matrix over a field. Without using Proposition 3.7 prove that A
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Theorem 4.1. Let E be an n-dimensional vector space over a field K,                                                           <f>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :   E— E a      >

                                                                                                                                                                                                          linear transformation and                             A an n X n matrix over K.
      is invertible if and only if \A\ 9* 0. [Hint: Theorems 2.6 and 3.5 (viii) and Proposi-

      tion 2.12.]                                                                                                                                                                                               (i)        There exists a unique monic polynomial of positive degree, q<t> e K[x], such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q*(«) =     and q<t> f /or all f e K[x] mc/z that f(0) = 0.
7.    Let F be a free ^-module with basis U =    u      u n If </>                                                   {        .   .   .   ,       }
                                                                                                                                                      .        :   F -> F is an ^-mod-                                                              \




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (ii) There exists a unique monic polynomial of positive degree, qA £ K[x], such
      ule endomorphism with matrix /4 relative to £/, then the determinant of the endo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                          that q A (A) -    fl/id q A f for all f e K[x] 5wr/z //wr f(A) = 0.
      morphism is defined to be \A\ e
                                   </>    and is denoted |<£|.                                                                                                                                                                                              |




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (iii)       //A           z'j   //7^ matrix of<f>     relative to some basis o/E, then q A                         = q^-
        (a)           |0   1       is independent of the choice of U.
        (b)                        is   the unique element of R such                                                                          that        /W>(£i),<W£ 2 ),      •   •   •   >   <KW)
                      \<t>\

                                                                                                                                                                                Fn and all                     PROOF, (i) By Theorem III. 5. 5 there is a unique (nonzero) ring homomorphism
      = \<f>\f(b u                      .   •   .       b n ) for every alternating /^-multilinear form on
                                                                                                                                                                                                          f = f*: K[x] -> HoniA (£,£) such that x\-^4> and A: — > Arljgr for all k e K. Conse-
                                                    ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |



      bi e F.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          quently, if ft K[x], then f (/) = /(<£). f is easily seen to be a linear transformation
8.    Suppose that (b u                                   .   .   .
                                                                      ,       /\ t ) is    a solution of the system of homogeneous linear                                                                 of ^-vector spaces. Since dim^is finite, HomA'(£,£) is finite dimensional over K by
      equations                                                                                                                                                                                           Theorems IV.2.1, IV. 2.4, IV.4.7, and IV.4.9. Thus Im f is necessarily finite dimen-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *




356                                                                     CHAPTER VII.                                           LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                         4.                  DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION                                                                                                                                               357



sional over K. Since K[x] is infinite dimensional over K, we must have Ker f     by                                                                                                                                                 ^               normals {p™ ij 1 < i < s; 1 < j < ki} is uniquely determined by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                E and          </>   and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pmupmj!. .p^si
Corollary IV.2.14. Since K[x] is a principal ideal domain whose units are precisely                                                                                                                                                                                is tne  mma i polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m       i                                                                             of p.
the nonzero elements of                                                 K (Corollary III.6.4), Ker f = (q) for some monic q e K[x\.
Since f is not the zero map, (q)                                                 ^ K[x], whence deg q > 1. If Ker f = foi) with                                                                                                                                  The polynomials q u                                                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,q in part (i) of the theorem are called the invariant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t




^e        monic, then ? q and            Theorem III. 3.2, whence q = q since both
                                                                    |
                                                                                 Y                        ^kby                                                                                                            x                         factors of the linear transformation </>. The prime power polynomials p™ i} in part (ii)
are monic. Therefore q<t> = q has the stated properties.                                                                                                                                                                                            are called the elementary divisors of </>.
    (ii) The proof is the same as (i) with A in place of </> and Mat n
                                                                       K in place of
HomK (£,£). q A e K[x] is the unique monic polynomial such that (q A ) = Ker £ A                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.2. (i) As indicated above E is a left module over
where £ A         -» Mat n # is the unique ring homomorphism given by f\-+f(A).
                             :
                                 #M                                                                                                                                                                                                                the principal ideal domain K[x] with fu = f(<t>)(u) (fe K[x], u e E). Since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E is finite di-
   (iii) Let A  be the matrix of relative to a basis U of £and let Uom K (E,E)                           <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                          :                                  ^     mensional over K and K C K[x], E is necessarily a finitely generated nonzero
Mat n /? be the isomorphism of Theorem 1.2, so that 0(</>) = A. Then the diagram                                                                                                                                                                   K[x]-modu\e. If  is the minimal polynomial of 0, then q^ ^      and ^Zs = 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q<t>

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   whence £ is a torsion     -module. By Theorem IV.6.12(i) E is the internal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   direct sum E = E ©     © E where each E is a nonzero cyclic #[x]-module      x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •       •




                                                                                                                     ^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t,


                                                                                             K[ x         ]                            -Homx(E,£)                                                                                                  of order q (q s #[*]) and </i # 2   q By the remarks preceding the theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l           {                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   each Ei is a 0-cyclic subspace. Since E{ has order qif there is a #[x]-module
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   isomorphism E                                                          ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ATfxJ/fe) by Theorem IV.6.4 and the example following it.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      {


                                                                                                                                           Mat n /^                                                                                                Since E ^       and every nonzero ideal in K[x] has a unique monic generator (Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rem III. 3. 2 and Corollary III. 6.4), we may assume that each q{ is monic of positive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   degree. The uniqueness statement of Theorem IV.6.12(i) and the fact that
  commutative by Theorem III.5.5 since             = 0(</>) = ^ = £ A (x) and 0f*(£)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,q are uniquely determined by the #[jt]-module E
is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q\ qi        qt imply that q u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .       .       .


= 6Ckl E ) = kln = $ A (k) for all k e K. Since is an isomorphism, (q<t>) = Ker f *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |        |                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (that is, by E and <t>). Use the #[;c]-module structure of E and the fact that Ei is
= Ker 0f * = Ker U = (q A ). Therefore, q* q A and q A q*, whence q* = ?a since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           {


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cyclic of order qi to verify that the minimal polynomial of
                                                                                                                                           \                             \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ei is qi. Finally                                                                                                                        </>     |




both are monic.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q E = q (<t>)E ©• -@q (<i>)E = 0, whence (q )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t                    t                           l   (q<j>). Since q+E = 0, we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                       t                                                                 t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q<t>E = 0, whence (q^)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                  (q ). Consequently, q = q* since both are monic and          C                   t                                                                         t


          If K, E, and </> are as in Theorem 4.1, then the polynomial q* [resp. q A ] is called
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fe) = (q<t>)- The second part of the theorem is proved similarly by decompos-
the minimal polynomial of the linear transformation </> [matrix A]. In general, q+ is                                                                                                                                                              ing E as a direct sum of cyclic #[jc]-submodules of prime power orders (Theo-
w?/ irreducible. Corollary 1.7 and Theorem 4.1(iii) immediately imply that similar                                                                                                                                                                 rem IV.6.12(ii)).
matrices have the same minimal polynomial.
   Let K, E, and </> be as above. Then <p induces a (left) #[jt]-module structure on E                                                                                                                                                                       REMARK. If                                                          = 0, then the proof of Theorem 4.2 shows that the minimal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <t>

as follows. If fe K[x] and u e £, then /(</>) e Homk(£,#) and fu is defined by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   polynomial of                                              <f>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is           x and its invariant factors [resp. elementary divisors] are qi = x,
/w = f(<t>)(u). A A:-subspace Fof E is said to be invariant under (or ^-invariant)                                                                                                                <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qi    = x,                 .   .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q n = x. (Exercise 2).
if <t>(F) a F. Clearly F is a </>-invariant tf-subspace if and only if F is a A:[x]-sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,




module of E. In particular, for any veE the subspace E(<t>,v) spanned by the set                                                                                                                                                                             The proof of Theorem 4.2 shows that the invariant factors and elementary di-
\<t>Kv)          |
                     /       > 0| is </)-invariant. It is easy to see that E(<t>,v) is precisely the cyclic                                                                                                                                        visors of a linear transformation </>  E—* £are simply the invariant factors and ele-                                                         :



A:[x]-submodule K[x]v generated by v. E(<t>,v) is said to be a <>-cycIic (sub)space.                                                                                                                                                               mentary divisors of the AT[x]-module E. Consequently, one can obtain the elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   divisors from the invariant factors and vice versa just as in the proof of Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IV.6.12 (see also pp. 80-81). A technique for calculating the invariant factors of a
Theorem 4.2. Let        E —> E be a linear transformation of an n-dimensional vector
                                                          <f>   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   specific linear transformation is discussed in Proposition 4.9 below.

space E over a field K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. Let K = Q and dim K E = 15 and suppose the invariant factors of
       There exist monic polynomials of positive degree qi,q 2
          (i)                                                                qt e K[x] and                                                                                                            .   .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q = x - x - 2, q = x - x* - 2x and q* = x - x - 2x
                                                                                                                                                                                             ,    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             are                                                            Then                                                                 b                                                             6               4      2

^-cyclic subspaces E u           E t of E such that E = Ei             E 2 ©• •© E t and
                                                                         .       .       .
                                                                                                 ,                                                                              ©                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <t>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qi = (x — 2)(x + 1), q = xq and qz = xq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              whence the elementary divisors of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                    .




                                                                      Ei Ei —> Ej. The se-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                               }                                                  2,
Qi Q2 I
            Qt- Furthermore qi is the minimal polynomial of
                 |
                     •   •   •
                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                               <t>       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                      :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   are: x - 2, x + 1, x, x - 2, x + 1, x x 2 - 2,x + 1. See the proof of Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                                       2                                  2                                           2                       2                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,

quence (qi,      q t ) is uniquely determined by E and <p
                                     .   .   .
                                                          and qt is the minimal polynomial
                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IV.6.12 and also p. 80. Conversely if the elementary divisors of a linear transforma-
of*.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tioni£arex -r- l,x - l,x - 2,x - 3,(x - 2) 2 ,jc 2
                     There exist monic irreducible polynomials pi,                                                                                                           p 8 £ K[x] and ^-cyclic sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + l,x + 1, + l,and(jt - l)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2               2                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,

          (ii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   then the invariant factors are qi = (x - l)(x 2                                                                                                                                         + 1), q = (x - 1)(jc - 2)(jc + 1)
                                                                                                                                                             .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s        hi                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2


spaces En,                           .   .   .       E lkl ,E 2     i,       .       .       •           E 2k ,,E   3 i,   .   .   .       E   8kfJ   of E such that E = X) 12 E                                                        ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and   and q, = (x - 3)(x - 2) 2 (x 2 + l)(x - l) 3                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                     ,                                 ,
                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              i   = l j= 1
for each i there is a nonincreasing sequence of integers m^ >                                                                                                                                m > i2               •       •   > miki >                       In view of Theorem 4.2 the next step in our analysis should be an investigation of
such that p™ ij is the minimal polynomial of* Eij E^ —> E V)                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                         :                           .       The family of poly                                    </>-cyclic spaces.
358                                                                 CHAPTER VII                                LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                             4.       DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION                                                                                       359



Theorem 4.3. Let         E — E be a linear transformation of a finite dimensional vec-
                                                   <t>
                                                           :           >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Corollary 4.4. Let \//                      :E^Ebea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              linear transformation ofa finite dimensional vector

tor space E over a field K. Then E is a ^-cyclic space and    has minimal polynomial                                                                                  <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             space E over a field K. Then E is a \p-cyclic space and xp has minimal polynomial

q = x r _|_ ar-ix
                  *"
                           h a e K[x] // and only if dim K E = r and E to an ordered                                                                                                                                                         q = (x — b) (b e K) if and only if dim                                            = r andE has an ordered basis relative to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                  1   1
                     H
basis      V relative to which the matrix of<t> is                                                                                                                                                                                           which the matrix of  is




                                                                           Ik                                              o          ..                                                                                                                                                         b   Ik                                              •       •




                                                                                           Ik                                                                                                                                                                                                        b         Ik                            •       •       •




                                                                                                               Ik                     •
                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b               Ik            •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •       •




                 A =

                                                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                                                       ••                      b           1   K
                                                       a            -ai           -a           2         -a     3     -a          4   •
                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                              — a -2 — a       r                                                                                                                                                                 -                           b


In this case              V=              {   v,<Kv),</> (v),
                                                                       2
                                                                                  .    .   .
                                                                                               ,   </>
                                                                                                         r_1
                                                                                                               (v)}   for some v e E.                                                                                                              The r X r matrix B is called the elementary Jordan matrix associated with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (x - b) r e K[x}. Note that for r = 1,B = (b).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
   The matrix A is called the companion matrix of the monic polynomial q e K[x].
Note that if q = x + a n then ^ = ( — r/ ).                     ,                                                                                                                                                                              SKETCH OF                   OF 4.4. Let <f> = f - b\ E e Hom K (E,E). Then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PROOF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q = (x — b) is the minimal polynomial of \p if and only if x r is the minimal poly-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nomial of <f> (for example, <t>r = (\p - b\ E ) r = qW) = 0). E has two J^[x]-module
      PROOF OF 4.3. (=*)If£is ^cyclic, then the remarks preceding Theorem 4.2                                                                                                                                                               structures induced by <t> and \p respectively. For every / £ K[x] and veE, f(x)v in the
show that for some v zE, E is the cyclic #[jc]-module K[x]v, with the #[x]-module                                                                                                                                                           ^-structure is the same element as f(x                                         — b)v in the ^-structure. Therefore, E is
structure             induced by                                <t>.
                                                                           If
                                                                           r- 1
                                                                                      ^ + k^v) +                                  •
                                                                                                                                      +k          r -i<t>
                                                                                                                                                                          r' l
                                                                                                                                                                                    ip)      =               (*.•     s /Q,

                                                                                                                                                                                                              = 0, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (^-cyclic if and only if                    E is i//-cyclic. Since
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i// =     + b\ E Theorem 1.2 shows that the
/=£ + £i*H                                             h A: r _ix   is a                            polynomial such that                                                                 /(4>)(tf)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <t>

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            matrix of <t> relative to a given (ordered) basis of E is the companion matrix A of x r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,




    = on is =
f(<t>)                                                        Since deg                            /< r - 1 < deg q and <7                                                          I   / by Theorem                            4.1(i),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            if    and only if the matrix of \p relative to the same basis is the elementary Jordan
we must have ki =                                              for all                     Therefore,                     {i?,<f<i?),
                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                    ~Kv)\         is         linearly inde-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   + bl associated with (x — b)
                                                                                  /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            matrix B = A
                                                                                                                                              •   •       •       ,       <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         To complete the proof simply apply
pendent. If fv = f(<t>)(v)(fe K[x]) is an arbitrary element of E = K[x]u, then by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Theorem 4.3 to          <f>   and translate the result into statements about \p, using the facts
division algorithm                                 f=qh + s, where s =                                                ^
                                                                                                                      i   =i
                                                                                                                                              has degree                                     /       with                 /   < deg q.      just developed.


Consequently, f(<t>) = q(<t>)K<t>)                                                +        s(<t>)         =         + *4>) = K4>) and fv = f(<t>)(v) =                                                                          s(<t>)(v)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  In order to use the preceding results to obtain a set of canonical forms for the
= k + k^v) H                                               h Ati^i?) with t < s - 1. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            relation of similarity on MatnA' we need
                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                      {v,<Kv\..-,<t> -Kv)\

spans E and hence is a basis. Since q(<f>) = Owe have <K<t> (v)) = <t> (v) = —
                                                                                                                                                                                    r   ~l                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
- fli<K^)       a r _i</> r_1 (^). It follows immediately that the matrix of <t> relative                                                                                                                                                   Lemma 4.5. Let                <f>       :   E — E be a linear transformation of an n-dimensional vector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >


to    |
          v,<t>(v),   .   .   .
                                  ,   <t>
                                              r   ~l
                                                       (v)} is the companion matrix of q.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            space E over a field K. For each i =                         1 ,   .   .   .   ,   t let     M be an ^ X {                               ni matrix over K, with

          (<=) If A           is      the matrix of <f> relative to the basis                                                                             {
                                                                                                                                                               v           = vu v            2,      .   .    •   ,   ^r},      then a      r»i   +n H2    h n t = n. Then E = Ei  E2           E t where each Ei is a (^-in-            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ©           ,




simple computation shows that v { = </> (u) for / = 2,            r and that <j> (v) = <Kvr)                                                                                                                                                variant subspace ofE and for each i, Mi is the matrix of <f> Ei relative to some
                                                                                                           l_1                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                                                      .       .       .    ,                                                                                                                                                                                                         \




   -     -
= aoV ai (Kv)                     r
                         a T -i<t> -\v). Consequently,     E is the  ^-cyclic space gener-                                                                                                                                                  ordered basis ofE iy if and only if the matrix of <t> relative to some ordered basis

ated by v and E = K[x]v. Since     q(<t>)(v) = 0, q(<t>) = OonE.   Since                                                                                                                                                                    ofE is



is linearly independent there can be no nonzero / e K[x] of degree less than r such that
f(<t>)
       = 0. A routine division algorithm argument now implies that q is the minimal
polynomial of <t>.


    If Eis considered as a right K- vector space and matrices of maps are constructed
      2                                                                                                                                                                                                                        accord-

ingly (as on p. 333) then the companion matrix of q must be defined to be
                                                                                 1
                                                                                   in order to                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            where the main diagonal of each Mi lies on the main diagonal ofM.
make the theorem true.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4.   DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION
360                                                     CHAPTER VII                    LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  361


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in part (ii) is said to be in primary rational canonical form and the
      A matrix of the form M as in Lemma 4.5 is said to be the direct sum of the ma-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               matrix J in (iii) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             said to be in Jordan canonical form. 3 The word "rational" refers to the fact
trices Mi,         .   .   .   ,       M   t
                                               (in this order).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             similarity of matrices occurs in the given field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and not in an extension field of                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (see Exercise 7).                                    The uniquely determined polynomials q u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,q in part (i) are                                                    .   .       .


      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.5. (=>) For each                                                                                        i     let       V be an ordered basis of
                                                                                                                                                    i                                                                                                        called the invariant factors of the matrix A. Similarly, the unique prime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          power poly-
Ei such that the matrix of <f>                                  |
                                                                    & relative to V         M Since E = E ©• •© E
                                                                                                      x       is                       t .                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h it                  7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nomials p ?*' in part (ii) are called the elementary divisors of the matrix A.

follows easily that V =                                U ^          is   a basis of E. Verify that M the matrix of                                           is                                                                    <f>       rela-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SKETCH OF PROOF OF  4.7. (ii) Let <f> K« -> AT- be the linear transforma-
               V (where K is ordered in the obvious way). (<=) Conversely suppose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :


tive to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tion with matrix A relative to the standard basis (Theorem 1.2). Corollary
U= [u u        .   .   .
                           E and M the matrix of relative to U Let E be the sub-
                           ,
                               un      ]   is a basis of                                                                           <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                  .                       x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Theorem 4.6 show that A is similar to the matrix D that is the direct sum in some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.7 and

space of E with basis {«„...,    and for >      let E be the subspace of E with              /                         1                       {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            order of the companion matrices of the elementary divisors p™ of 0. If A is
                                                                                                                                         ThenE = £i ©£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t}


basis {« r+ i,        where r = /ii + n 2 H
                       .   .
                               .   ,
                                       u r+ni  h  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2       © •©£<,      -   •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            similar to D u where                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is the direct sum of the companion matrices of a family
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           also

each £ is ^-invariant
          t
                      and     is the matrix of           M  {                                         <f>      \
                                                                                                                       E relative to
                                                                                                                               {                                      {
                                                                                                                                                                              u r+u       -   •   •       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u r +n           t   |     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            prime power polynomials /i,      ,/6 e K[x], then D is the matrix of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    relative to    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <t>

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            some basis of Kn (Corollary 1.7). By Theorem 4.3 and Lemma 4.5 Kn = E                                                                                                                     @E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                   y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            © © E where each E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bi                                       {   is a ^-cyclic subspace                        and f is the minimal polynomial of
Theorem 4.6. Let :E-+E be a linear transformation of an n-dimensional vector
                                                <f>                                                                                                                                                                                                         4>   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ei. The                   uniqueness statement of Theorem 4.2 implies that the polynomials                                                                                       are
space E over a field K.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     precisely the elementary divisors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           order of the companion matrices of the p™ along the main diagonal. The proof of (i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of 4>, whence D differs from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            lj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A only in the
        (i)    E has a basis relative to which the matrix of                                                                           <f>
                                                                                                                                             is    the direct sum                                          of the com-                                     and (iii) is similar, except that in (i) a stronger uniqueness statement is possible since
panion matrices of the invariant factors q u       q e K[x] of'</>.                      .   .        .   ,                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the invariant factors (unlike the elementary divisors) may be uniquely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ordered by
    (ii) E has a basis relative to which the matrix of (p is the
                                                                  direct sum of the com-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            divisibility.
panion matrices of the elementary divisors p™          p™ sk " £ K[x] of<p.                      11
                                                                                                      ,   .        .       .   ,




         Ifthe minimal polynomial q of<f> factors as q = (x- bi) (x
      (iii)
                                                                ri  - b 2) rz    - b d ) rd                                                                                                           -       •




(bi e K), which is always the case ifK is algebraically
                                                          closed, then every elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Corollary 4.8. Let <p E                                                     — E be a linear transformation of an n-dimensional vector
divisor of<f>is of the form (x - bO (j < u) and E has a basis relative to
                                                                              which the
                                                                               j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :            >


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           space E over a field K.
matrix of4> is the direct sum of the elementary Jordan matrices associated with the ele-
mentary divisors of <t>.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (l)       If4> has matrix                                A e Mat n K relative to some basis, then the invariant factors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [resp.                 elementary divisors] of                                      > are the invariant factors [elementary divisors] of A.
   The proof, which is an immediate consequence of results 4.2-4.5 (and unique                                                                                                                                                                                       (ii)          Two matrices in Mat n K are similar if and only if they have the same invariant
factorization in K[x] for (iii)), is left to the reader. The next corollary immediately                                                                                                                                                                    factors [resp. elementary divisors].

yields two (or three if                               K is algebraically closed) sets of canonical forms for the rela-
tion of similarity on Mat n #.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF. Exercise.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               REMARK. If is an element of a field K, then the matrix kln is a direct sum of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A:


Corollary 4.7. Let A be an n X n matrix over afield K.                                                                                                                                                                                                     the    X companion matrices of the irreducible polynomials x - k,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x - k.                                                                            .       .   .   ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Therefore, x - k,        ,x - k are the elementary divisors of kln by Corollary 4.7.
               A is similar to a matrix D such that D is the direct sum of the companion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .   .


        (i)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Consequently, if ^ ^ £ then kjn and k In are not similar by Corollary  2>   4.8. Thus if                 2
matrices of a unique family ofpolynomials q u                                                         .   •        .
                                                                                                                           ,   qt e K[x] such that qi                                                         |       q2       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Qt-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K is infinite there are infinitely many distinct equivalence classes under similarity in
The matrix D is uniquely determined.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mat„/C On the other hand, there are only n
       (ii)    A is similar to a matrix M such that M is the direct sum of the companion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +   1       distinct equivalence classes under
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equivalence in Mat n tf by Theorem 2.6.
matrices of a unique family of prime power polynomials p™
                                                                    p™ sk ° e K[x], where                                                           11
                                                                                                                                                         ,    .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                              ,




each Pi is prime (irreducible) in K[x].                                            M
                                          is uniquely determined except for the order of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EXAMPLE. Let £ be a finite dimensional real vector space and <p :E-+E a
the companion matrices of the    p™   along its main diagonal.            ij



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q = X - 4x + 5x - 4x + 4 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           linear  transformation with invariant factors           A
               IfK is algebraically closed, then A is similar to a matrix J such that J is a direct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
       (iii)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (x - 2) (a- + 1) e R[ x and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q = x + 6x + 14x* - 20x + 25x - 22x + 12x -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2       2                                                                    1        6                            4
               the elementary Jordan matrices associated with a unique family of
                                                                                 polynomials                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ]                    2                                                                  3               2
sum of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S = ( x - 2) (a* + 1)2 s r[ v]. By Theorem 4.6(i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dim*£ = 11 and the minimal poly-
of the form (x - b) (b e K). J is uniquely determined except for the order of
                   m                                                          the ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nomial of                           is q 2   .   The remarks after Theorem 4.2 show that the elementary divisors
mentary Jordan matrices along its main diagonal.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Warning: rational and Jordan canonical forms are defined somewhat differently
       The proof is given below. The matrix D in part (i), is said to be in rational canoni-                                                                                                                                                               some authors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by
cal form or to be the rational canonical form of the matrix A. Similarly, the matrix M
362                                             CHAPTER VII                             LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                        4.           DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION                                                                                                                    363


of    <t>
            in    R[x]    are              (x       - 2) = x - 6x + 12* - 8,
                                                             3           3                   2
                                                                                                                              (x - I) 2 = *
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                          - 4x + 4,        We close this section by presenting a method of calculating the invariant factors
(^2 _|_ 1)2      = ^4 _j_ 2x + 1, and jc + 1.
                                      2                          2
                                                                                        By Theorem 4.6 E has two bases relative to                                     of a given matrix A, and hence by Corollary 4.8 of any linear transformation that
which the respective matrices of                                 </>   are                                                                                             has matrix A relative to some basis. This method is a consequence of




                                                                                                                                                                      Proposition 4.9. Let A be an n X n matrix over a field K. Then the matrix ofpoly-
                                                                                                                                                                      nomials xl n — A £ Mat n K[x] is equivalent (over K[x]) to a diagonal matrix with                                                                                                       D
                                                                                          1                                                                           nonzero diagonal entries fu                                    .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fn £ K[x] such that each U is monic and fi                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f2   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              f„.

      D                                                                                                     1                                                         Those polynomials U which are not constants are the invariant factors of A.
                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                        1                                REMARK. If A: is a field, then K[x] is a Euclidean domain (Corollary III.6.4).
                                                                                                                                                  1                   Consequently, the following proof together with the Remarks after Proposition 2.11
                                                                                                                                                                      show that the matrix D may be obtained from xln — A by a finite sequence of ele-
                                                                                    -12                             -25                20    -14
                                                                       8                                22
                                                                                                                                                             /        mentary row and column operations. Thus Proposition 4.9 actually provides a con-
                                                                                                                                                                      structive method for finding invariant factors.                                                                             An example is given after the proof.
                                  1

                                                1

                          -12                   6
                                                                                                                                                                               SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.9. Let                                                                         <t>    :   AT* -> AT*       be the AT-linear transforma-
                                                                                                                                                                      tion with matrix A  = (a ) relative to the standard basis {e,-} of Kn As usual ATn is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {]                                                                                                       .



                                                                                                                                                                      #M-module with structure induced by          Let F be a free ATM-module with basis                       </>.


                                                                                                                                                                      U = «i,        u n and let w F —» ATn be the unique ATM-module homomorphism
      M                                                                                                                                                                         I


                                                                                                                                                                      such that ir(ui) =
                                                                                                                                                                                          .    .   .




                                                                                                                                                                                           for / = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,     j                               :




                                                                                                                                                                                                              n (Theorem IV.2.1). Let \p F -> F be the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e,-                                      .   .   .       ,                                                              :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                      unique ATM-module homomorphism such that \p(ui) = xu { — 23 a^Uj. Then the

                                                                                                                                                                      matrix of \p relative to the basis U is xln — A.
                                                                                                                                                                               We claim that the sequence of ATM-modules F                                                                              F A Kn —               >     is exact. Clearly it
                                                                                                                                                                      is   a    /^M-module epimorphism. Since A is the matrix of                                                                                               and the ATM-module
The matrix D is in rational canonical form and      is in primary rational canonical                        M                                                         structure of ATn is induced by <f>,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     </>




form. If £is actually a complex vector space and \p E — £is a linear transformation                             :




with the same invariant factors^ = (x - 2) (x + 1) £ C[x] and#> = (* - 2f(x + l)
                                           2  2                               2     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7T(xUi)           = X7T(Ui) = X£ = <£(£ ) = 23 ai£i-
s   CM, then since x +            2
                                            1       = (* + /)(* -                                in   CM, the elementary divisors of \p in                                                                                                                                         t                t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J   =l
CM are (x - 2)            3
                              ,
                                      (x   - 2)      2
                                                         ,
                                                             (x      +     z)
                                                                                2
                                                                                    ,
                                                                                        (x       +      (* - /)
                                                                                                      /),        and (* -
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                               Therefore,         /).


relative to       some basis of £, \p has the following matrix in Jordan canonical form                                                                               Consequently, for each /


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = n^xui — 23 a u^j = ir(xUi) —
                                                                                                                                                                                                            W'(tft)                                                           {j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^       fl„7r(w,)



                                                                                                                                            \                                                                              = 23 flfjSy - 23 a ifii = °>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 J                                    j

                                                                                                                                                                      whence Im \p d Ker ir. To show that Ker ir <Z Im \p it suffices to prove that every
                         J =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                      element w of F is of the form w = \{/(v)                                                                 + 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M/j       i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e *S               e         For in this case if
                                                                                                                                                                      w s Ker 7r, then
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        = tt(w) = 7T^(V) + tt(23 k,u ) =                                            3              + 23 *|S/.
                                                                                                                                            ./.
                                                                                                                                                                      Since {s   is a basis of K
                                                                                                                                                                                    y (           kj =                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                          for all j. Consequently, w = ^(y) and hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,



      REMARK.            The invariant factors in K[x] of a matrix A z                                                             M at„AT are the same as            Ker 7T C Im f Since every element of F is a sum of terms of the form fu with                                                                                                            {


the invariant factors of A in F[x], where Fis an extension field of AT (Exercise 6). As                                                                               /£ K[x], we need only show that for each / and /, there exist v« e F and kj e K such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
the previous example illustrates, however, the elementary divisors of A over       may                                                                        K
 differ from the elementary divisors of A over F.
                                                                                                                                                                      that x'Wi = f(Uit)                         +^         A:y«y.               For each / and / = 1, we have xu                                               {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = ^(w ) -f- 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
364                                                                        CHAPTER VII                                                       LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                                                                          4.    DECOMPOSITION OF A SINGLE LINEAR TRANSFORMATION                                                       365



(an s K). Proceeding inductively assume that for each; there exist v jm t-i e Fand k jr £
                                    -l
                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            K                                                                                   10+  -Ot       2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -(jc  + 2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \


such that x                     l
                                         Uj   = yp(v                      -i)          + =                     kj r u r          .       Then for each /
                                                                    Jtt
                                                                                                   r       l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,0                           jc   +2     >


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <_1
                   x*ui             = x'-Kxiii) = x'-HiKui) + X) tow) = ^(x'-'ud + X) fli^                                                                                                                                                         «y
                                                                                                                                             i                                                                           3




                                                                                       i                                                                         r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Therefore by Corollary 4.8 and Proposition 4.9 the invariant factors of A and                                                are
                                                                                   j                                                             r                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x + 2 and (* + 2) 2 and their minimal polynomial is (x + 2) 2                                        .



Thus x'wt = ^(^it) +                                        X                                  with            ^ = xt~ lu + X aaVj.t-i e Fand c = X      <                                                                               r              fl »'j*j> 2         ^
                                                                r                                                                                                                ;                                                                 i

and the induction is complete. Therefore F                                                                                                                                           F ^> Kn ->0 is exact and hence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EXERCISES
Kn 9* F/Ker                          tt       = F/Im ^.
         Since K[x] is a principal ideal domain, Proposition 2.11 shows that xln — A is                                                                                                                                                                                                    Note: Unless stated otherwise, E is an /z-dimensional vector space over a field K.

equivalent to a diagonal matrix                                                                            D=                                                            where r is the rank of xln — A and L r                                                                                   A and B are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 .   If                    /*   X   /*   matrices over AT with minimum polynomials q and <y 2 re-                  x


isan r X r diagonal matrix with nonzero diagonal entries /i,      fe        such that                                                                                                                .       .       .       ,               AM                                            spectively, then the minimal polynomial of the direct sum of A and                                        B (a 2n X 2/2
              We may assume each /; is monic (if necessary, perform suitable ele-
               •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           matrix) is the least common multiple of q and q 2
/i /•I     I                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y          .




mentary row operations on D). Clearly the determinant \xln — A\ in K[x] is a monic
polynomial of degree n. In particular, \xln - A\ ^ 0. By Definition 1.8 and Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.     The            linear transformation                       E-+E has invariant factors [resp. elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           divisors] qi       = x, q = x,                            q n = x.
                                                      a unit multiple of \xln - A\          whence \D\ ^ 0. Consequently, all                                                                                                                                                                                         2          .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
3.5(iii), (iv), \D\ is                                                                                                                                                       9



the diagonal entries of                                              D are nonzero. Thus L = D and r = n. Since Z) is equivalent                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.     (a) Let a,b,c be distinct elements of and let   e Mat 6          K        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    be the diagonal matrix      #
to xln         — A, D is the matrix of \p relative to some pair of ordered bases V = {v u                                                                                                                                                                             .,v n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are <?i = * — a,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with main diagonal a,a,a,b,b,c. Then the invariant factors of                                      D
and       W = {wi,                                         wn             of F (Theorem 1.6). This means that \p(vd =                                                                                                                                   for each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = (x - a)(x - b) and q = (x - a)(x - b)(x - c).
                                                                     © •©
                                          .   .   .                  \
                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <? 2                                          3
/andlm ^ = K[x]fwi                                                                     •
                                                                                                           K[x]fn w n Consequently,              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b) Describe the invariant factors of any diagonal matrix in Mat n #.



                                                  ^ F/Ker  = F/Im ^ = „.               tt
                                                                      K[x]fiWi@--©K[x]fn wn
                                                                                                                                                                         .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                     —^                                                                                             4. If q is            the minimal polynomial of a linear transformation </>:£->£, with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dim*£ = n, then deg q < n.
                                                  ^K[x]wJK[x]fw Q)- '®K[x]wn /K[x]fn wn                            x
                                                                                                                                                     •



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.     The minimal polynomial of the companion matrix of a monic polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           / s K[x] is precisely /.
where each f is monic and f\ /2          fn For some / (0 < / < /i), /i = / =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                            •    •       •
                                                                                                                                                             .                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Let F be an extension field of K. The invariant factors in K[x] of a matrix
                                                                                                                                             |



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.
= /i = Uandy; + i,..                               < /, K[x]/(f) =K[x]/(l K )=
                                                                .
                                                                     , /n
                                                                          are nonconstant. Thus for /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A s Matntf are the same as the invariant factors in F[x] of A considered as a
and for / > /, K[x]/(fd is a cyclic #M-module of order /. Therefore, K is the in-
                                                                        n

ternal direct sum of nonzero torsion cyclic #[;t]-submodules (0-cyclic subspaces)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kn is an F-basis of Fn Use linear transforma-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           matrix over F. [Hint: A ^T-basis of                                                      .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tions.]
Et+i,     .En of orders /,+,,
               .    .   ,      fn respectively such that ft+l ft+2      f- Since the   .       .   .
                                                                                                       ,                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I




KM-module structure of Kn is induced by          = fE = /(<*>)£. It follows readily                                                                          <fc                         {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7.     Let F be an extension field of K. A B £ Mat n #                           C Mat„F are similar over F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        f                                                    if and
that / is the minimal polynomial of    E Therefore, ft+u        fn are the invariant                                       <t>       \           {.                                          .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           only if they are similar over K [see Exercise 6].
factors of <t> (and hence of A) by Theorem 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8.     A £ Mat n #is similar to a diagonal matrix if and only if the elementary divisors of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A are all linear.
         EXAMPLE. If                                      <t>   :
                                                                     Q — Q is a linear transformation and relative to some basis
                                                                           3
                                                                                           >
                                                                                                       3



                                                                               /                                 4                               2\                                                          /x                              -4                       -2\           9.     IfA £ Mat n # is nilpotent (that is, ^ r = for some r > 0), then A is similar to a
the matrix of                                     is                 =         I       -1                      -4                    -l), then xh - A =                                                      I       1                   * + 4                          1     1.           matrix all of whose entries are zero except for certain entries \ K on the diagonal

                                                                               \                                                     -lj                \0                                                                                               x + 2/                            next above the main diagonal.

Performing suitable elementary row and column operations yields:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10.     Find all possible [primary] rational canonical forms for a matrix A e MauQ
                                                                                                                            x + 4                                                                                                                                                          such that (i) A is 6 X 6 with minimal polynomial (x — 2) 2 (a: 3); (ii) A is 7 X 7     +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with minimal polynomial (* 2                              + 1)(* - 7). Find all possible Jordan canonical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           forms of A considered as a matrix over C.
366                                                                           CHAPTER VII. LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                       5.   THE CHARACTERISTIC POLYNOMIAL, EIGENVECTORS AND EIGENVALUES                                                                                              367



11. If  A is the companion matrix of a monk polynomial fe K[x], with deg /= n,                                                                                                  Theorem 5.2. Let                                <t>   :   E — E be a linear transformation of an n-dimensional vector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >


      show explicitly that A — xln is similar to a diagonal matrix with main diagonal                                                                                           space over a field                              K with characteristic polynomial p £ K[x], minimal polynomial
          IkAk,                        .       .   .    ,   lx,/.                                                                                                               q    £ K[x],          and invariant factors qi,                              .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,   q t £ K[x].

12.    At Mauris idempotent provided A = A. Show that two idempotent matrices                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                        (i)       The characteristic polynomial is the product of the invariant factors; that is,
       in Mat n K are similar if and only if they are equivalent.                                                                                                               P* = qiq2- -q t = qiq 2 -qt-iq*.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          •                               -   •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p^(</>) = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                   (ii) (Cayley-Hamilton) <j> is root ofits characteristic polynomial; that is,
13.       Ann X n matrix A is similar to its transpose A                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                                   (iii) An irreducible polynomial in K[x] divides
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      p // and only if it divides q                                                                                .



                                                                                                                                                                                Conclusions (i)-(iii) are valid, mutatis mutandis, for any matrix A £ Mat n K.


                                                                                                                                                                                      PROOF. By Theorem 4.6 4> has a basis relative to which                                                                              <t>   has the matrix D
5.    THE CHARACTERISTIC POLYNOMIAL, EIGENVECTORS                                                                                                                              that is the direct sum of the companion matrices of q u                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   q   t .    Therefore, p* = p D
      AND EIGENVALUES                                                                                                                                                          = qiq*'-qt by Lemma 5.1. Furthermore,         = q by Theorem 4.2, whence                              q<t>   t


                                                                                                                                                                                      = since q^) = 0. (iii) is an immediate consequence of (i) and the fact
                                                                                                                                                                               /><*>(</>)

   In this section we investigate some more invariants of a linear transformation of a                                                                                         that qi q     q The analogous statements about A £ Mat^AT are proved similarly
                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t .

finite dimensional vector space over a field. Since several of these results are valid
                                                                                                                                                                               using Corollaries 4.7 and 4.8.
more generally  we  shall deal whenever possible with free modules of finite rank over
a commutative ring with identity.
                  A is an n X n matrix over a commutative ring K with identity, then xln — A h
                                                                                                                                                                                  REMARK. The Cayley-Hamilton Theorem (Theorem 5.2(ii)) is valid over any
      If
                                                                                                                                                                               commutative ring with identity (Exercise 2).
an n X n matrix over K[x], whence the determinant \xln — A\ is an element of K[x].
The characteristic polynomial of the matrix A is the polynomial p A = \xh — A £ K[x].                                                                                 \




Clearly, p A is a monic polynomial of degree n. If B £ Mat n # is similar to A, say
B = PAP'                              1
                                           ,       then since xln is in the center of the ring Mat n K[x],                                                                     Definition 5.3. Let <f>   E — E be a linear transformation of a vector space E over a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :              >

                                                                                                                                                                               field K. A nonzero vector u £ E is an eigenvector (or characteristic vector or proper
                                                       p B = \xln -B\ = \xh - PAF-*\ = \P(xIn - A)R-i\                                                                         vector) of<f> if<t>(u) = ku for some k £ K. An element k £ K is an eigenvalue (or
                                                                      = \P\\xln - A\\P\~ = \xln - A\ = p A                l
                                                                                                                                                            \                  proper value or characteristic value) of     if <f>(u) = ku for some nonzero u £ E.           <f>




that is, similar matrices have the same characteristic polynomial.
                                                                                                                                                                                  It is quite possible for two distinct (even linearly independent) eigenvectors to
      Let <t>                     :    E — E be an endomorphism of a free ^-module E of finite rank n (see
                                                                                                                                                                               have the same eigenvalue. On the other hand, a set of eigenvectors whose corre-
Definition IV.2.8 and Corollary IV.2.12). The characteristic polynomial of the endo-
                                                                                                                                                                               sponding eigenvalues are all distinct is necessarily linearly independent (Exercise 8).
morphism   (denoted p ) is defined to be p A where A is any matrix of relative to
                                      <t>                                                                         ,                                             <t>


some ordered basis. Since any two matrices representing are similar by Corollary                                                          <t>


1.7, p<t> is independent of the choice of A.
                                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 5.4. Let <t> E —> E be a linear transformation of a finite dimensional vector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :



                                                                                                                                                                               space E over afield K. Then the eigenvalues of <t> are the roots in      of the char-                                                             K
                                                                                                                                                                               acteristic polynomial p^> of <t>.
Lemma 5.1. (i) // Ai,A                                                        2,   .    .   .   ,   A are square matrices (of. various sizes) over a com-
                                                                                                     r


mutative ring                                       K with identity and pj £ K[x] is the characteristic polynomial of A,, then
PiP2
          -
                  •
                          Pr e K[x]                          is       the      characteristic polynomial                              of the matrix         direct    sum of      REMARK. The characteristic polynomial p^ e K[x] need not have any roots in
Ai,A 2                                         A                                                                                                                               K, in which case <t> has no eigenvalues or eigenvectors.
                      ,   .   .   .    ,               r.



      (ii) The companion matrix C of a monic polynomial f £ K[x] has characteristic

polynomial f.
                                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.4. Let A be the matrix of <t> relative to some
                                                                                                                                                                               ordered basis. If k £ K, then kln - A is the matrix of kl E - <t> relative to the same
                                                                                                                                                                               basis. If <f>(u) = ku for some nonzero ueE, then (kl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E - <t>)(u) = 0, whence
      SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) If A £ Mat n K and B e Mat m                                                                                              then
                                                                                                                                                                               kl E - <t>is not a monomorphism. Therefore, kln — A is not invertible (Lemma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5)
                                                                                                                                                                               and hence \kln - A\ =                                               by Proposition 3.7 or Exercise 3.6. Thus A: is a root of
                                                                                                                      A                   A           In
                                                                                                                                                                = \A\\B\.
                                                                                                         whence                                                                P* = \xln - A\. Conversely, if A: is a root of then \kln - A\ = 0. Consequently,
      (o                          b) = (o                             1)(o                      £)•                           B                 Im          B
                                                                                                                                                                               k\ E -   is not an isomorphism by Lemma 1 .5 and Proposition 3.7 (or Exercise 3.6).

An inductive argument now shows that the determinant of a direct sum of matrices                                                                                               Since   is finite dimensional, k\ E — <t> is not a monomorphism (Exercise IV.2.14).
                                                                                                                                                                                        E
Bu    ,Bk is \Bi\\B
      .       .       \B k (ii) To show that /is the characteristic polynomial of C,
                      .                                       2   \
                                                                      •   •
                                                                                   \.
                                                                                                                                                                               Therefore, there is a nonzero u £ E such that (k\ E — <f>)(u) = 0, whence <t>(u) = ku
expand \xln — C\ along the last row.                                                                                                                                           and k is an eigenvalue of                                          <f>.
                                                                                                                                                      .




368                                                       CHAPTER VII                              LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                                                        5.     THE CHARACTERISTIC POLYNOMIAL, EIGENVECTORS AND EIGENVALUES                                                                          369


       If A: s AT is an eigenvalue of an endomorphism <f> of a ^-vector space E, then it is                                                                                                                 Let A: be a commutative ring with identity. The trace of an n n matrix A = ( aij)                                      X
easy to see that C(<f>,k) =                                   {
                                                                  v s   E <t>(v) = kv} is a nonzero subspace of £; C(0,£) is
                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                         over K is a n    a 22 H         +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h nn £ # and is denoted TrA. The trace of an endomor-
called the eigenspace or characteristic space of k.                                                                                                                                                      phism               of a free AT-module of rank n (denoted Tr</>) is Tr/1, where A is the matrix
                                                                                                                                                                                                         of     <t>   relative to some ordered basis. Since p+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = p A is independent of the choice of
                                                                                                                                                                                                         the matrix A, so is Tr</> by Proposition 5.6. Similar matrices have the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       trace by
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Corollary 1.7 (or by an easy direct argument using (iii) below). It is easy to see that
Theorem 5.5. Let         E — E be a linear transformation of a finite dimensional vector
                                           <f>   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                         for any A,B s Mat n A: and k s K:
space E over a field K. Then has a diagonal matrix D relative to some ordered basis
                                                                  <t>


ofE if and only if the eigenvectors of span E. In this case the diagonal entries ofD   <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (i)    lr(A + B) = Tr/* + Tr£;
are the eigenvalues of <t>                                        and each eigenvalue                                    ksK appears on the diagonal                                                              (ii)      Tr(£/1) = £Tr/*;

dimKC(<t>,k) times.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (iii)      Tr(AB) = Tr(£/*)-
                                                                                                                                                                                                         The connection between the trace as defined here and the trace function of Galois
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Theory (Definition V.7.1) is explored in Exercise 9.
       PROOF. By Theorem IV.2.5 the eigenvectors of span E if and only if E has a                                          <t>


                                       U = {u u ...,un is a basis of eigenvectors
basis consisting of eigenvectors. Clearly                                                                                             }




with corresponding eigenvalue k u     k n s Kif and only if the matrix of <t> relative
                                                                               .   .   .     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EXERCISES
to Uis the diagonal matrix D with main diagonal k u k 2 ...,£„. In this case suppose                                             ,


              n                                                                                                                                                                                                 Note: Unless stated otherwise K is a commutative ring with identity.
that v =     23 nui is an eigenvector of                                                               with       <f>(v)   = kv. Since U is linearly inde-
             i=i                                                                                                                                                                                          1 .    Prove directly that a matrix over K and its transpose have the same characteristic
                       n                                                                            n                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 polynomial.
pendent and 53                                        = £t? = <£(*>) = 53                                >*
                                                                                                             t   0("i)   = 53 nkiUi, we have £r = r h                                  t             x

                   i=l                                                                            i^l                       i=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.     (Cayley-Hamilton) If <f> is an endomorphism of a free ^-module E of finite
for all /. Thus for each / such that rt                                                    ^ 0, k = h; (since v ^ 0, at least one r ^ 0).                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                           t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rank, then/?^) = 0. [Hint: if A is the matrix of
Therefore, k u     .  k n are the only eigenvalues of <t>. Furthermore, if k is an eigen-
                       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      andB = xln - A, then BaB =<f>
                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \B\In = p$In in M&\ n K[x}. If £is a AT[*]-module with structure induced by
value of <f) that appears t times on the diagonal of     D and u h      w are those ele-                                                  ,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and \p                                          <f>
                                                                                                                                                                    /f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is the#M-module endomorphism E->E with matrix B, then ^(w) = *w - 0(«)
ments of U with eigenvalue k, then this argument shows that {wtl                uit spans                                                                           .    .   .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0(w) - 0(w) = for all u s E.]
                                                                                                                                                                ,                 ,    \




C(<t>,k). Since {« fl ...,«»,} is linearly independent it is a basis of C(<t>,k). There-
                               ,



fore, dim/tC(<£,£)                 = /.                                                                                                                                                                  3.     If A is an n X w matrix over A: and B an m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 X n matrix over AT, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -O^b = * uPba. Furthermore, if m = a, then pab =      [///>//: let C,Z) be the

       The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of an n X n matrix A over a field Kare defined to
be respectively the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the unique linear transformation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (/w     +     /i)    X (m +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                and observe that \CD\ = |Z)C|J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          az)   matrices over AT[jc]: C =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ^               and D =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^B         ^/ )
4> \K -> K that has matrix A relative to the standard basis. Theorem 5.4
     n      n                                                                 shows
that the eigenvalues of A are the eigenvalues of any endomorphism of an /z-dimen-                                                                                                                        4.     (a)         Exhibit three                 3X3 matrices over Q no two of which are similar such that
sional vector space over                                  K which has matrix A relative to some basis.                                                                                                          -2 is the only eigenvalue of each of the matrices.
       We close this section with a brief discussion of another invariant of a matrix                                                                                                                           (b) Exhibit a 4 X 4 matrix whose eigenvalues over R are ±1 and whose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eigen-
under similarity.                                                                                                                                                                                               values over C are ±1 and dti.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.     Let A: be a field and A e Mat n AT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a)           is   an eigenvalue of A if and only if A is not invertible.
Proposition 5.6. Let K be a commutative ring with identity. Let    be an endomor-                                                                         <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) If k u          .   .   .   ,   k r s K are the (not necessarily distinct) eigenvalues of A and
phism of a free K-module of rank n and let A = (a*;) e Matjt be the matrix of                                                                                                                                   fe K[x], then f(A) g Mat^ has eigenvalues /(*,),                                      .   .   .   J(k ).       r


  relative to some ordered basis. If the characteristic polynomial of    and A is                                                                                                <t>
<t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6.     If          and \p are endomorphisms of a finite dimensional vector space over an
       = Pa = x n + Cn-iX "                          11   1
                                                              H               h Cix         + Co £ K[x], then                                                                                                                                                       K such that
P</>                                                                                                                                                                                                            algebraically closed field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <t>\p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          = ^0, then              <f>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and ^ have a common
                       (-l) n c = |A|                                    and               -c„_i = a n + a H                     22               h a„„.                                                        eigenvector.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         7.     (a)     Let     <t>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and ^ be endomorphisms of a finite dimensional vector space E
       PROOF. Co = p*(0) = |0/B - A\ = \-A\ = (-\Y\A\                                                                     by Theorem 3:5(viii).                                                                 such that 0^ =                   If E has a basis of eigenvectors of and a basis of eigen-              <t>


Expand p+ = \xln - A\ along                                                   the                first       row. One term of this expansion is                                                                 vectors of \p, then £ has a basis consisting of vectors that are eigenvectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                                                                                                                                                          n' 1                                 n~2
(x     - a u )(x - 022)                •    •    •(*      - a nn ) = x n - (a n + ^22 H   h a nn )x  + b n ^x +                                                                                                 both           and \p.
       b Q for some h s
        f_                                                 No other term of this expansion contains any terms with                                                                                              (b) Interpret (a) as a                           statement about matrices that are similar to a diagonal
a factor of x n_1 whence —c n ~i = a n
                       ,                                                                     +     •     •
                                                                                                             +                                                                                                  matrix.
                                                                                                                     .




370                                CHAPTER VII             LINEAR ALGEBRA


 8.   Let <f>    :   E — E be a linear transformation of a vector space E over a field K. If C/
                        »


      is   a set of eigenvectors of <t> whose corresponding eigenvalues are all distinct,
      then Uis linearly independent. [Hint: If U were linearly dependent, there would
      be a relation r u x H x h ru =    (u { s i/;
                                         t    t    ^ rt s K) with / minimal. Apply the
      transformation ki\ E — <t>, where                <£>(«i)   =         and reach a contradiction.]

      Let F be an extension field of a field A' and u s F. Let       F —> F be the endo-
 9.

      morphism of the vector space F     given  by      > wi?.       —
                                                                                     :

                                                                                                                                                        CHAPTER VIII
        (a) Then Tr<£ is the trace of w, T
                                            F (u), as in Definition V.7.1. [////i/: first try
                                                       K
      the case when F = K(u)].
           (b)   The determinant of

      Let K be a field and A e Mat n X.
                                        <f>   is the   norm of u, NK *\u).
                                                                                                                                   COMMUTATIVE RINGS
10.
        (a) If /4 is nilpotent (that is, A
                                           m =              for some w), then Tr^ r =
      [Hint: the minimal polynomial of A r has the form a-' and A
                                                                                     r
                                                                                                 for all r   >
                                                                                         is similar to a matrix
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                      AND MODULES
      in rational or Jordan canonical form.]
           (b) If char      K=   and Tr A r =      for all r     >   1,   then ^ is nilpotent.




                                                                                                                         For the most part this chapter is a brief introduction to what is frequently called
                                                                                                                         commutative algebra. We begin with chain conditions (Section 1) and prime ideals
                                                                                                                         (Section 2), both of which play a central role in the study of commutative rings.
                                                                                                                         Actually no commutativity restrictions are made in Section 1 since this material is
                                                                                                                         also essential in the study of arbitrary rings (Chapter IX).
                                                                                                                             The theory of commutative rings follows a familiar pattern: we attempt to obtain
                                                                                                                         a structure theory for those rings that possess, at least in some generalized form,
                                                                                                                         properties that have proven useful in various well-known rings. Thus primary de-
                                                                                                                         composition of ideals (the analogue of factorization of elements in an integral do-
                                                                                                                         main) is considered in Sections 2 and 3. We then study rings that share certain de-
                                                                                                                         sirable properties with the ring of integers, such as Dedekind domains (Section 6)
                                                                                                                         and Noetherian rings (Section 4). The analysis of Dedekind domains requires some
                                                                                                                         knowledge about ring extensions (Section 5). This information is also used in proving
                                                                                                                         the Hilbert Nullstellensatz (Section 7), a famous classical result dealing with ideals
                                                                                                                         of the polynomial ring K[x u   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                    ,   *„].
                                                                                                                            Except in Section 1, all rings are commutative. The approximate interdepen-
                                                                                                                         dence of the sections of this chapter (subject to the remarks below) is as follows:




                                                                                                                         A broken arrow A — ^ B indicates that an occasional result from Section A is used in
                                                                                                                         Section B, but that Section B is essentially independent of Section A. Section 1 is not
                                                                                                                         needed for Section 5 but is needed for Section 4. Only one important result in Section
                                                                                                                         4 depends on Sections 2 and 3. This dependence can be eliminated by using an al-
                                                                                                                         ternate proof, which is indicated in the exercises.

                                                                                                                                                                               371
372              CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                   1.    CHAIN CONDITIONS                                                                373



1.    CHAIN CONDITIONS                                                                                 A maximal element in a partially ordered set (C, < ) was defined in Section 7 of the
                                                                                                    Introduction. A minimal element is defined similarly: b s C is minimal if for every
      In this section we summarize the basic facts about the ascending and descending
                                                                                                    c £     C which is comparable to b, b < c. Note that it is not necessarily true that b < c
chain conditions for modules and rings that will be needed in the remainder of this                 for all csC. Furthermore,       C may contain many minimal elements or none at all.
chapter and in Chapter IX. Rings are not assumed to be commutative, nor to have
identity elements.

                                                                                                    Definition 1.3.                                  A module A is said to satisfy the maximum condition [resp. minimum
                                                                                                    condition] on submodules if every nonempty set ofsubmodules of                                                                        A contains a maximal
Definition 1.1.     A module A is said to satisfy the ascending chain condition (ACC) on            [resp. minimal] element {with respect to set theoretic inclusion).

submodules {or to be Noetherian) //for every chain Ai        C
                                                           A2 A 3   C      C   •   •   ofsubmod-
ules of A, there is an integer n such that Ai = A„ for all i > n.
    A module B is said to satisfy the descending chain condition (DCC) on submodules               Theorem 1.4. A module A satisfies the ascending [resp. descending] chain condition
{or to be Artinian) //for every chain B ZD B ZD B 3 ZD
                                            L       2      of submodules ofB, there is
                                                              •
                                                                                                   on submodules if and only if A satisfies the maximal [resp. minimal] condition on
an integer m such that Bi = B m for all > m.    i
                                                                                                   submodules.


      EXAMPLE. The Z-module (abelian group) Z satisfies the ascending but not the                           PROOF. Suppose A                minimal condition on submodules and
                                                                                                                                                                          satisfies      the
                                                                               co
descending chain condition on submodules (Exercise II. 3. 5). The Z-module Z{p                 )
                                                                                                   A    x   ZD A 2 Z>           •   •   •       is               i > 1
                                                                                                                                                         a chain of submodules. Then the set \A {
                                                                                                                                                                        has a minimal                                             \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              )




satisfies   the descending but not the ascending chain condition (Exercise II. 3. 13).             element, say A n Consequently, for / > n we have A n ZD A by hypothesis and
                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {


      If a ring R is considered as a left [resp. right] module over itself, then it is easy to
                                                                                                   A n CZ Ai by minimality, whence A { = A n for each / > n. Therefore, A satisfies the
see that the submodules of R are precisely the left [resp. right] ideals of R. Con-                descending chain condition.
sequently, in this case it is customary to speak of chain conditions on left or right                 Conversely suppose A satisfies the descending chain condition, and 5 is a non-
ideals rather than submodules.                                                                     empty set of submodules of A. Then there exists B z S. US has no minimal element,
                                                                                                   then for each submodule B in S there exists at least one submodule B' in S such that
                                                                                                   B ZD B' For each B in 5, choose one such B' (Axiom of Choice). This choice then de-
                                                                                                                  .




Definition 1.2.      A ring R is left [resp. right] Noetherian ifR satisfies the ascending         fines a function                         / 5 -> S by B H B'. By the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduc-
                                                                                                                                                     :




chain condition on left [resp. right] ideals. R is said to be Noetherian ifR is both left          tion (with                 f=f for all n) there
                                                                                                                                            n                                      is   a function <p        :   N -» S such that
and right Noetherian.
                                                                                                                                                         <p(0)         = Bo   and        <p{n   + 1) = f(<p(n)) = <p{n)'.
      A ring R is left [resp. right] Artinian ifR satisfies the descending chain condition on
left [resp. right] ideals.     R is said to be Artinian ifR is both left and right Artinian.       Thus if Bn £ S denotes <p{n), then there is a sequence B ,B U                                                         .    .       .   such that B Z> B ZD  x



                                                                                                   B 3
                                                                                                    2         •       •
                                                                                                                              This contradicts the descending chain condition. Therefore, S must have a
   In other words, a ring R is (left or right) Noetherian if it is a (left or right) Noe-
                                                                                                                          .




therian /^-module, and similarly for Artinian. Consequently, all subsequent defini-                minimal element, whence A satisfies the minimum condition.
tions and results about modules that satisfy the ascending or descending chain                              The proof for the ascending chain and maximum conditions is analogous.
condition on submodules apply, mutatis mutandis, to (left or right) Noetherian or
Artinian rings.
                                                                                                   Theorem 1.5. LetO—>A^>B^>C^>0bea short exact sequence of modules. Then
      EXAMPLES. A division ring D is both Noetherian and Artinian since the only                   B satisfies the ascending [resp. descending] chain condition on submodules if and only if
left or right ideals are   D and 0, (Exercise III.2.7). Every commutative principal ideal          A and C satisfy                              it.


ring is Noetherian (Lemma III. 3. 6); special cases include Z, Z„, and F[x] with F a
field.                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. If B satisfies the ascending chain condition, then so
                                                                                                   does its submodule f{A). By exactness A is isomorphic to f{A), whence A satisfies

      EXAMPLE. The ring Mat n D of all n X n matrices over a division ring is both
                                                                                                   the ascending chain condition. If                                               dCC C        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                             is a chain of        submodules of C, then
                                                                                                   g~KC0 CZ g- {C ) CZ          l
                                                                                                                           is a chain of submodules of B. Therefore, there is an n such
                                                                                                                                            2              •   •   •


Noetherian and Artinian (Corollary 1.12 below).                                                    that g~KCd = g~\C n ) for all i>n. Since g is an epimorphism by exactness, it follows
                                                                                                   that      d = C for all      n                              /   > n. Therefore, C satisfies the ascending chain condition.
      REMARKS. A right Noetherian [Artinian] ring need not be left Noetherian                         Suppose A and C satisfy the ascending chain condition and Bi CZ B 2 CZ                                                                           •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is   a
[Artinian] (Exercise   Exercise II. 3. 5 shows that a Noetherian ring need not be
                         1).                                                                       chain of submodules of B. For each let                                                /'




Artinian. However every left [right] Artinian ring with identity is left [right] Noether-
ian (Exercise IX. 3. 13 below).                                                                                                                                ^ = f~\f{A)                    Bi)   and          C = g{B     i ).
374                 CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                  1.       CHAIN CONDITIONS                                                                                                375


Let fi = f\ Ai and gi = g                                 |
                                                              B    {.   Verify that for each / the following sequence is exact:                  Theorem 1.9. A module A satisfies the ascending chain condition on submodules if
                                                                                                                                                 and only if every submodule of A is finitely generated. In particular, a commutative
                                                                                                                                                 ring R is Noetherian if and only if every ideal ofR is finitely generated.
                                                                    O-^Ai^Bi^O-* 0.
                                                                                                                                                    PROOF. (=>) If B is a submodule of A, let S be the set of all finitely generated
Verify that A   x   (Z A 2 (Z     •       •       •
                                                           and C (Z C2 (Z x
                                                                                        •   •   •
                                                                                                    .   By hypothesis there exists an integer    submodules of B. Since S is nonempty (0 e S), S contains a maximal element C by
n such that A { = A n and C» = Cn for all / > n. For each / > n there is a commutative                                                           Theorem 1 .4. C is finitely generated by c u c 2  c„. For each b e B let D b be the sub-                                 .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,               ,

diagram with exact rows:                                                                                                                         module of B generated by b,c u c 2      c n Then D b e S and C (Z D b Since C is maxi-  .   .   .                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                ,                                                                              .



                                                                                                                                                 mal, D b = C for every b e B, whence b e D b = C for every bzB and B C C. Since
                                                                                                                                                 C CZ B by construction, B = C and thus B is finitely generated.
                                                                                                                                                                 (<=) Given a chain of submodules A x CZ A 2 CZ A z CZ                                                                                 •       •       •   ,   then it is easy to verify
                                                                                                                                                 that |J Ai                                   is      also a             submodule of A and therefore finitely generated, say by
                                                                                                                                                                  i   >1
                                                                                                                                                 au          .   .    •   ,
                                                                                                                                                                              a k Since each a,- is an element of some A j9 there is an index n such that
                                                                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                                 a   l   e       A n for = 1,2,       /                  .   .   .   ,   k. Consequently, |J Ai CZ                                        A n whence A = A n for i > n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                                 {                       m
where a and 7 are the respective identity maps and ft is the inclusion map. The Short                                                                        We close this section by carrying over to modules the principal results of Section
Five Lemma IV. 1 1 7 implies that ft is the identity map, whence B satisfies the ascend-
                          .
                                                                                                                                                    on subnormal series for groups. This material is introduced in order to prove
                                                                                                                                                II. 8
ing chain condition. The proof for descending chain condition is analogous.
                                                                                                                                                Corollary 1.12, which will be useful in Chapter IX. We begin with a host of defini-
                                                                                                                                                tions, most of which are identical to those given for groups in Section II. 8.
                                                                                                                                                             A normal series for a module A is a chain of submodules: A = A Z> A Z>                                                                                                                  x

Corollary 1.6. If A is a submodule of a module B, then B satisfies the ascending [resp.                                                         A    2       Z)       •   •   •   Z) A„. The factors of the series are the quotient modules
descending] chain condition if and only if                                            A and B/A satisfiy              it.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ai/A i+l              (/       = 0,1, ...,/! - 1).
      PROOF. Apply Theorem 1.5 to the sequence 0-+A-->B-+B/A-+0.                                                                                The length of the series is the number of proper inclusions ( = number of nontrivial
                                                                                                                                                factors). A refinement of the normal series A Z> A Z>     Z> A n is a normal series                                                        x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •       •       •




                                                                                                                                                obtained by inserting a finite number of additional submodules between the given
Corollary 1.7. IfA u          .       .       .
                                                      ,
                                                              A n are modules, then the direct sum Ai                        A ©• •© A„
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                                                ones.A proper refinement is one which has length larger than the original series. Two
satisfies the ascending [resp. descending] chain condition on submodule s if and only if
                                                                                                                                                normal series are equivalent if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the non-
                                                                                                                                                trivial factors such that corresponding factors are isomorphic modules. Thus
each Ai satisfies it.
                                                                                                                                                equivalent series necessarily have the same length. A composition series for A is a
                                                                                                                                                normal series A = A Z> A Z> A 2 Z>     Z> A n =  such that each factor A k /A k+X
   SKETCH OF PROOF. Use induction on n. If n = 2, apply Theorem 1.5 to the                                                                                                                                                  x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •   •   •




                                                                                                                                                (k = 0,1,     n — 1) is a nonzero module with no proper submodules. 1
          A AA         A — 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                  .           .

sequence          A   x       x                                2              2   >
                                                                                                                                                                                          .       ,




                                                                                                                                                   The various results in Section II. 8 carry over readily to modules. For example, a
                                                                                                                                                composition series has no proper refinements and therefore is equivalent to any of its
Theorem 1.8. //R is a left Noetherian [resp. Artinian] ring with identity, then every                                                           refinements (see Theorems IV.1.10 and                                                 II. 8.4 and Lemma II. 8.8). Theorems of
finitely   generated unitary left R-module                                            A satisfies the ascending [resp. descending]              Schreier, Zassenhaus,                                                and Jordan-Holder are valid for modules:
chain condition on submodules.


      An analogous statement is true with "left" replaced by "right."                                                                           Theorem 1.10. Any two normal series of a module A have refinements that are
                                                                                                                                                equivalent. Any two composition series of                                                                         A are equivalent.
      PROOF OF 1.8. If A is finitely generated, then by Corollary IV.2.2 there is a
free /^-module      F with a finite basis and an epimorphism ir F—> A. Since Fis a direct                         :

                                                                                                                                                             PROOF. See the corresponding results for groups (Lemma II.8.9 and Theorems
sum of a finite number of copies of R by Theorem IV.2.1, Fis left Noetherian [resp.                                                             II. 8. 10                 and II. 8.11).
Artinian] by Corollary 1.7. Therefore A ^ F/Ker tt is Noetherian [resp. Artinian] by
Corollary 1.6.                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                             UR
                                                                                                                                                         has an identity, then a nonzero unitary module with no proper submodules is said
                                                                                                                                                to be simple. In this case a composition series is a normal series A = A ZD   z> A n =                                                                                                   •   •   •



      Here is a characterization of the ascending chain condition that has no analogue                                                          with simple factors. If R has no identity simplicity is defined somewhat differently; see Defini-
for the descending chain condition.                                                                                                             tion IX. 1.1                      and the subsequent Remarks.
376                                 CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                      2.     PRIME AND PRIMARY IDEALS                                                            377



Theorem 1.11. A nonzero module A has a composition series ifand only ifA satisfies                                                                                                                                          EXERCISES
both the ascending and descending chain conditions on submodules.
                                                                                                                                                                   1.    (a)   The ring of all 2 X 2 matrices                               such that a is an integer and b,c are

                                                                                                                                                                         rational is right Noetherian but not left Noetherian.
          PROOF. (=>) Suppose A has a composition series S of length n. If either chain
condition fails to hold, one, can find submodules                                                                                                                        (b)   The ring of all 2 X 2 matrices                              such that */is rational and r,s are real
                                                                                                                                               f




                                               A = A        ZD Ai ZD An ZD                        •     Z> A n ZD A n+U                                                 is   right Artinian but not left Artinian.
                                                            *               *             *                *       *
                                                                                                                                                                   2. If / is    a nonzero ideal in a principal ideal domain R, then the ring R/l is both
which form a normal series T of length n + 1. By Theorem 1.105 and 7 have refine-                                                                                       Noetherian and Artinian.
ments that are equivalent. This is a contradiction since equivalent series have equal
length. For every refinement of the composition series S has the same length n as S,
                                                                                                                                                                  3.    Let S be a multiplicative subset of a commutative Noetherian ring R with identity.

but every refinement of T necessarily has length at least n -f 1 Therefore, A satisfies                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                        Then the ring S _1 R is Noetherian.
both chain conditions.                                                                                                                                            4.    Let R be a commutative ring with identity. If an ideal / of R is not finitely gener-
                                                                                                                                                                        ated, then there is an infinite properly ascending chain of ideals Ji                                       CJ C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •   •




          (<=) If B is a nonzero submodule of A, let S(B) be the set of all submodules                                                                     C of
                                                                                                                                                                        such that Jk (Z I for all k. The union of the Jk need not be /.
B such that C ^ B. Thus if B has no proper submodules, S(B) = {0}. Also define
5(0) =   0} For each B there is a maximal element B' of S(B) by Theorem 1 .4. Let S
              {     .




be the set of all submodules of A and define a map / S -»S by f(B) = B'\ (the                                          :
                                                                                                                                                                  5.    Every homomorphic image of a                             left   Noetherian   [resp. Artinian] ring is left

Axiom of Choice is needed for the simultaneous selection of the B'). By the Recur-                                                                                      Noetherian [resp. Artinian].
sion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction (with                                                             / = fn for all n) there is a function                      6.    A ring R is left Noetherian [resp. Artinian] if and only if Mat n R is left Noetherian
ip    :   N — S such that
              >
                                                                                                                                                                        [resp. Artinian] for every n                   >    1   [nontrivial].

                                             *>(0)   = A     and            <p(n + 1) = f(<f(n)) = *>(/!)'.                                                             An Artinian integral domain is a field. [Hint: to find an inverse for a ^ 0, con-
                                                                                                                                                                  7.

                                                                                                                                                                        sider (a) ZD {a 2 ) ZD (a 3 ) ZD
                                                          3 A ZD A ZD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           •   •   •


If   A denotes                      <p(z),   then ^          x              2
                                                                                      •   •   •
                                                                                                  is   a descending chain by construction,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .]



whence for some n, A = A n for all >           {                   /                Since A n+l = A n = f(A n ), the definition of
                                                                                                                           '



/shows that A n+l = A n only if A n =                                               = ^ n+1 Let m be the smallest integer such
                                                                                                       .




that A m = 0. Then m < n and A k ^                                                for all k                < m. Furthermore for each k < w,
           is a   maximal submodule of >!* such that A k ZD A k+i Consequently, each A k /A k+l                    .


                                                                                                                                                                  2.    PRIME AND PRIMARY IDEALS
is nonzero and has no proper submodules by Theorem IV. 1.10. Therefore,
A ZD Ail} -15 A m = Oisa composition series for A.
                        -       •                                                                                                                                     Our main purpose is to study the ideal structure of certain commutative rings.
                                                                                                                                                                  The basic properties of prime ideals are developed. The radical of an ideal is intro-
                                                                                                                                                                  duced and primary ideals are defined. Finally primary decomposition of ideals is
                                                                                                                                                                  discussed. Except for Theorem 2.2, all rings are commutative.
                                                                                                                                                                      We begin with some background material that will serve both as a motivation
Corollary 1.12. If D is a division ring, then the ring Mat n D of all n X n matrices
                                                                                                                                                                  and as a source of familiar examples of the concepts to be introduced. The motiva-
over       D is both Artinian and Noetherian.                                                                                                                     tion for much of this section arises from the study of principal ideal domains. In
                                                                                                                                                                  particular such a domain D is a unique factorization domain (Theorem III. 3. 7).
                                                                                                                                                                     The unique factorization property of D can be stated in terms of ideals: every
    SKETCH OF PROOF. In view of Definition 1.2 and Theorem 1.11 it suffices
                                                                                                                                                                  proper ideal of D is a product of maximal (hence prime) ideals, which are deter-
to show that R = Mat n D has a composition series of left /^-modules and a composi-
                                                                                              R be the matrix with \ D in position (/,/)                          mined uniquely up to order (Exercise III. 3. 5). Every nonzero prime ideal of D is
tion of right ^-modules. For each                                      /'
                                                                            let     e{ e
                                                                                                                                                                  of the form (/?) with p prime ( = irreducible) by Theorem III. 3.4 and   n =
and elsewhere. Verify that Re = {Ae \AeR\isa left ideal (submodule) of R con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                             t                  {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ).                           (p)       (p
                                                                                                                                                                  Consequently, every proper ideal (a) of D can be written uniquely (up to order)
sisting of all matrices in R with column j zero for all j ^ /. Show that Re is a minimal
nonzero left ideal (that is, has no proper submodules). One way to do this is via ele-
mentary transformation matrices (Definition VII.2.7 and Theorem VII.2.8). Let
                                                                                                                                                   {

                                                                                                                                                                  in the form
                                                                                                                                                                                     (   ^ = ^y^^y                 .              =     ^ ^ n         p   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fl (/>,»-),


M =                                                                    h e ). Verify that each M is a left
                  and for               /    > 1 let Af,- = R(e, + e H                2                        x                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                  where each n { >    and the p are distinct primes (Exercise III. 3. 5). Now an ideal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           {



ideal of/? and that                          M /M _i ^ Ra, whence R = Mn ZD AfB _, Z> Z) A/, Z> M =
                                                1     t
                                                                                                                                   •   •   •                      Q = (p n ) (p prime) has the property: ab e Q and a \Q imply b k e Q for some k
                                               similar argument with the right ideals         A                                                                   (Exercise III. 3. 5). Such an ideal is called primary. The preceding discussion shows
is    a composition series of left /^-modules.
e{ R    = \e{ A A e R] shows that R has a composition series of right ^-modules.                                                                                  that every ideal in a principal ideal domain is the intersection of a finite number of
                            \
                                                                                                                                                                     .




378               CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                               2.            PRIME AND PRIMARY IDEALS                                                                                 379



primary ideals in a unique way. Furthermore there is an obvious connection between                                           and hence in                   U ft. Therefore a + a a
                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x       2   3 -       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -a n       = bj with bj e Pj. If j > 1, then ai e Ph
these primary ideals and the prime ideals of D; in fact every primary ideal (p ) = (p)
                                                                              n        n
                                                                                                                             which is a contradiction. If / = 1, then a 2 a 3 a n e ft, whence a { e ft for some / > 1                       -    •



is a power of a prime ideal.
                                                                                                                             by Theorem III. 2. 15. This also is a contradiction.
    In the approach just outlined the viewpoint has switched from consideration of
unique factorization of elements as products of primes in D to a consideration of the
"primary decomposition" of ideals in the principal ideal domain D. We shall now
                                                                                                                             Proposition 2.4. IfR is a commutative ring with identity and P is an ideal which is
investigate the "primary decomposition" of ideals in more general commutative
                                                                                                                             maximal in the set of all ideals ofR which are not finitely generated, then P is prime.
rings (where, for instance, ideals need not be principal and primary ideals may not
be powers of prime ideals). We begin with some facts about prime ideals.
                                                                                                                                PROOF. Suppose ab e P but a \ P and b ft Then P + (a) and P + (b) are                                                  If


                                                                                                                             ideals properly containing P and therefore finitely generated (by maximality).
                                                                                                                            Consequently P + (a) = ( Pl + r,a, ...,/?„ + rn a) and P + (b) = (/?/ +
Theorem 2.1. An ideal P         R) in a commutative ring R is prime ifand only ifR — P                                      Pm' + rm 'b) for some a,a' e P and /\,r/ £ R (see Theorems III.2.5 and III.2.6). If
is a multiplicative set.                                                                                                    J = {reR\raeP}, then J is an ideal. Since ab e P, (/?/ + r/b)a = p/a + n'ab e P
                                                                                                                            for all   whence P CZ P + (b) CZ J. By maximality, J is finitely generated, say J =
                                                                                                                                                 /,

      PROOF. This is simply a restatement of Theorem III.2.15; see Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
III.4.1.                                                                                                                    t/i,     •   •   •   Jk)- If ^ £ ft then ^ £ P                                       + (a) and hence for some s e R, x = ^ 5,0, + r^)           {
                                                                                                                                     n                       n                                                                                                                                      i= 1

      REMARK. The set of all prime ideals in a ring R is called the spectrum of R.
                                                                                                                             =   X
                                                                                                                                 i'=l
                                                                                                                                                          + ]C W*. Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                            i=l                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5t rt > = * - J)         i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    £ P, whence            X)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £ «J.

                                                                                                                                                                                      n                              k                                      n                       k
                                                                                                                            Thus for some /, e R,
                                                                                                                                                                                     i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                           s    ^ = ]C Uji and * =                       Wi 23                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Therefore, P is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i=i                 t=i        i=i
Theorem 2.2. If S is a multiplicative subset of a ring R which is disjoint from an                                          generated by Pu    /w'ifl,   J           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,                   .   .   .       k a, which is a contradiction. Thus a eP or beP


ideal I ofR, then there exists an ideal P which is maximal in the set of all ideals of
                                                                                                                            and P is prime by Theorem III.2.15.
R disjoint from S and containing I. Furthermore any such ideal P is prime.

      The theorem is frequently used in the case 7 = 0.                                                                     Definition 2.5. Let I be an ideal in a commutative ring R. The radical (or nilradical)
                                                                                                                            of I, denoted Rad I, is the ideal D P, where the intersection is taken over all prime
      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 2.2. The set S of all ideals of R that are disjoint                                                ideals P which contain I. // the set ofprime ideals containing I is empty, then Rad I is

from S and contain / is nonempty since / s S. Since                     5^0 (Definition                    III.4.1) every   defined to be R.
ideal in S is properly contained in R. S is partially ordered by inclusion. By Zorn's
Lemma there is an ideal P which is maximal in S. Let AJB be ideals of R such that                                                    REMARKS. If R has an identity, every ideal I (^R) is contained in a maximal
AB C P. If A      &
                P and B £f P, then each of the ideals P + A and P + B properly                                              ideal     M by Theorem III.2.18. Since M ^ R and Mis necessarily prime by Theorem
contains P and hence must meet S. Consequently, for some PitP, aeA, beB                                                     III.2.19, Rad I                  ^ R. Despite the inconsistency of terminology, the radical of the zero
                                                                                                                            ideal is sometimes called the nilradical or prime radical of the ring R.
                     + a = s S and p + b = s eS.
                           Pi       Si                         2            2



Thus Sis = pip + P\b + ap + ab e P + AB CZ P. This is a contradiction since
              2    2            2
                                                                                                                                EXAMPLES. In any integral domain the zero ideal is prime; hence Rad                                                                                                             = 0.
Sis 2 e   S and S D P = 0. Therefore A CZ P or B CZ P, whence P is prime.                                                   In the ring Z, Rad (12) = (2) D (3) = (6) and Rad (4) = (2) = Rad (32).




Theorem 2.3. Let K be a subring of a commutative ring R. IfP l9  Pn are prime            .   .    .
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                            Theorem 2.6. If I is an ideal in a commutative ring R, then Rad 1= {r£R|r n £l
                   K C Pi U P2 U
ideals ofR such that                    U Pn then K CZ P for some i.
                                         •   •       •
                                                                   ,                 £
                                                                                                                            for some n >                         }




      REMARK. In the case n < 2, the following proof does not use the hypothesis                                                   PROOF. If Rad / = ft then {r e R r» £ /} C Rad /. Assume Rad / * R. If                          \




that each Px is prime; the hypothesis is needed for n
                                                   > 2.                                                                     r n £ / andP is any prime ideal containing /, then rn e P whence r e P by Theorem
                                                                                                                            III.2.15. Thus                   \reR\r n eI] CZ Rad /.
   PROOF OF 2.3. Assume K £f ft for every It then suffices to assume that
                                                                       /.
                                                                                                                                 Conversely, if / £ R and r | / for all n > 0, then 5 =                                                                             {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +x n    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e    N*; x e 1} is a
n >  and n is minimal; that is, for each
          1                                 K $ZL U P For each there exists
                                                         /",                    jm                     /
                                                                                                                            multiplicative set such that S D I = 0. By Theorem 2.2 there is a prime ideal P dis-
                                                                                                                            joint        from S that contains /. By construction, / { P and hence /                                                                                                  Rad /. Thus
aieK — |J ft. Since K CZ U ft, each a £ ft. The element ai + a a -an lies in K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                If

                                                 x                                       2       3 -
                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                            t\   {   r £  R r n £ /} implies t Rad /, whence Rad / CZ {r e R rn e 1}
                                                                                                                                                      |                                         If                                                                              \           .
                                                                                                                                                                                  .




380                       CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                       2.               PRIME AND PRIMARY IDEALS                                                                                        381



Theorem 2.7. If I, Ii, h,                                   •   •       .   ,   In are ideals in a commutative ring R, then:                                                          Theorem 2.10. Let Q and P be ideals in a commutative ring R. Then Q is primary for
                                                                                                                                                                                      P if and only if:
            (i)   Rod (Rod I) = Rod I;

        (ii)      Rod (lil^                        -In)   = Rad(n                         Ij       = fl ^Ij;
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (i)         QCPC RadQ; and
                                                                                \y=i
                                                                                               )
                                                                                                     y=i                                                                                           (ii)         //ab £ Q and a                             Q, then b e P.
                                                                                               /                                                                                                                                                      If



      (iii)       Rad(\ m ) = Rad\.
                                                                                                                                                                                          SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose (i) and (ii) hold. If ab s Q with a \ Q, then
      SKETCH OF PROOF. In each case we prove one of the two required contain-                                                                                                         b £ P CZ Rad 2, whence £ n £ Q for some « > 0. Therefore Q is primary. To
ments, (i) If r s Rad (Rad /), then r
                                                                                           n
                                                                                               e   Rad / and hence rnm = (rn ) m e I for some                                         show that Q is primary for P we need only show P = Rad Q. By (i), P (Z Rad Q.
n, m > 0. Therefore, r e Rad / and Rad(Rad /) <Z Rad                                                             /. (ii) If r e f) Rad /,, then                                       U be Rad 2, let n be the least integer such that b n s Q. If n = 1, b £ 2 (Z P. If
there are          m um                            ,m n >           such that r mj s / for each;. If w = wi                                   +m H                      h w„,
                                                                                                                                                                                      « > 1, then Z? n                           ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                = b n eQ, with Z^" 1 C by the minimality of n. By (ii), be P. Thus             1


                          2,   .       .       .                                                         3                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                      Z>   £       Rad Q implies b e P, whence Rad Q CZ P. The converse implication is easy.
then r m = r mi r m2               -       •
                                                   -r mn £ /i/2     -
                                                                                /«, whence           f)      Rad /, (Z Rad (/r            •   •/„).       Finally since
                                                                                                     3


h •••/» C= f| //, we have Rad(/r ••/„) CZ Rad(f| //)•                                                                       (iii)    is       a special case of
                     3                                                                                           *                                                                    Theorem 2.11. //Qi,Q 2                                               ,    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   Q n are primary ideals in a commutative ring R, all of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
(ii).
                                                                                                                                                                                      which are primary for the prime ideal P, then f) Q                                                                                           {   is also a primary ideal belonging
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i = i


Definition 2.8.                        An ideal Q(^ R) in a commutative ring R is primary if for any                                                                                  to P.

a,beR:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n                                                                                                               n
                               ab £ Q                     and               a ^   Q       =>        bn £ Q       for some           n > 0.                                                         PROOF. Let Q = f| Qi- Then by Theorem 2.7(h), Rad Q = f| Rad &
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n                                                      i=i                                                                                                          i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                      = fl P = P; in particular, Q CZ P CZ Rad £?. If aZ> £ Q and a I 2, then ab e Q and
      EXAMPLE. Every prime ideal is clearly primary. If p is a prime integer and                                                                                                            i      =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    {



n > 2 a positive integer, then (p) = (/?") is a primary ideal in Z which is not prime
                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                      a | ft for some /. Since Qi is P-primary, bePby Theorem 2.10(ii). Consequently, Q
(Exercise 17). In general, a power P
                                                                                      n
                                                                                          of a prime ideal P need not be primary.                                                     itself is P-primary by Theorem 2.10.


        EXAMPLE. If F is a field, the ideal (x,y) is maximal in F[x,y] (Exercise 12) and
therefore prime (Theorem III.2.19). Furthermore (x,y)
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                         = (x\xy,y 2) <Z (x\y) CZ (x,y).                              Definition 2.12.                                        An ideal I in a commutative ring R has a primary decomposition //
                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                      I    = Qi fl Q                         2   fl        Q„ with each Qi primary. Ifno Q, contains Q H            D      D                                            x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -   -   -



The ideal C*r 2 ,>>) is primary and (x,y) is the only (proper) prime ideal containing (x ,y)
                                                                                                                                                                                      Q i+ fl   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                •   •   fl       Q n and the radicals of the Qi are all distinct, then the primary decomposi-
(Exercise 12). Hence the primary ideal (x ,y) is not a power of any prime ideal in
                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                                      tion is said to be reduced (or irredundant).
F[x yl  9




In the rest of this section all rings have identity.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem 2.13. Let I be an ideal in a commutative ring R. If I has a primary decom-
Theorem 2.9. IfQ is a primary ideal in a commutative ring R, then Rad Q is a prime                                                                                                    position, then I has a reduced primary decomposition.

ideal.
                                                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. If / = Q fl      fl Q n (Q { primary) and some Q contains Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x             fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fl•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •   •   •




   PROOF. Suppose ab e Rad Q and a k Rad Q. Then a n b n = (ab) n s Q for some n.                                                                                                     Qi   n Q i+l n
                                                                                                                                                                                                i       n q W9 then / = q n         n •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n  Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i+l n   n  Q n is also a                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q^               •   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

                                                                                                                                                                                         r
Since a \ Rad £?, a n \ Q. Since C is a primary, there is an integer m > such that                                                                                                    primary decomposition. By thus eliminating the superfluous Qi (and reindexing) we
(b n ) m £ £?, whence Z> £ Rad                                  Q. Therefore, Rad Q is prime by Theorem III.2.15.
                                                                                                                                                                                      have / = <2i                        H    fl Q k with no Qi containing the intersection of the other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •          •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Q jm Let
                                                                                                                                                                                      Pi,      .    .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                P   r   be the distinct prime ideals in the set {Rad              Rad Q k \. Let
   In view of Theorem 2.9 we shall adopt the following terminology. If Q is a                                                                                                         Qx (1 < / < r) be the intersection of all the Q\ that belong to the prime Pi. By Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                      rem 2.1 1 each Q/ is primary for P Clearly no Q contains the intersection of all the
primary ideal in a commutative ring R, then the radical P of Q is called the associated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x .                               {

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k                      r
prime ideal of Q. One says that Q is a primary ideal belonging to the prime P or that Q                                                                                               other Q/. Therefore, I =
             P or that Q is P-primary. For a given primary ideal Q, the associated
is primary for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f] Qi =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i=i                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D= Qi, whence / has a reduced primary de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i



prime ideal Rad Q is clearly unique. However, a given prime ideal P may be the                                                                                                        composition.

associated prime of several different primary ideals.
                                                                                                                                                                                         At this point there are two obvious questions to ask. Which ideals have a reduced
        EXAMPLE. If p is a prime in Z, then each of the primary ideals (/? ), (/? ),                                                                        2       3
                                                                                                                                                                          .   .       primary decomposition? Is a reduced primary decomposition unique in any way?
                                                                                                                               2               2      2         2   3
                                                                                                                                                                                      Both questions will be answered in a more general setting in the next section (Theo-
belongs to the prime ideal (p). In the ring Z[x,y] the ideals (x ,y), (x ,y \ (x ,y ). etc.
are all primary ideals belonging to the prime ideal (x,y) (Exercise 13).                                                                                                              rems 3.5 and 3.6).
382                       CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                       3.        PRIMARY DECOMPOSITION                                                          383



                                                                  EXERCISES                                                                                          15.    Let/:/?       ^ 5 be an epimorphism of commutative rings with identity.                                           If J is an
                                                                                                                                                                            ideal of 5, let I = f~\j).
      Note: R is always a commutative ring.                                                                                                                                   (a)       Then / is primary in R if and only if J is primary in S.
      Let R be a commutative Artinian ring with identity.                                                                                                                     (b) If J is primary for P, then / is primary for the prime ideal f~\P).
 1.

        (a) Every prime ideal of R is maximal [Hint: Theorems III.2.16 and III.2.20
                                                                                                                                                                     16.    Find a reduced primary decomposition for the ideal / = (x 2 ,xy,2) in Z[x,y] and
      and Exercises 1.5 and 1.7].                                                                                                                                           determine the associated primes of the primary ideals appearing in this decom-
        (b) R has only a finite number of distinct prime ideals.
                                                                                                                                                                            position.

 2. If     R has an identity and {Pi                                  i s     /} is      a nonempty family of prime ideals of R
                                                                  \


                                                                                                                                                                     17. (a) If p is prime and n   > 1, then (p n ) is a primary, but not a prime ideal of Z.
      which is linearly ordered by inclusion, then                                                         U P and {                (~)   Pi are prime ideals.
                                                                                                                                                                            (b)   Obtain a reduced primary decomposition of the ideal (12600) in Z.

 3. If     PU P  2,   .   .
                              .   ,   Pn are prime ideals in R and / is any ideal such that /                                                   &   Pi for all /,    18. If   F is a field and / is the ideal (x ,xy) in F[x,y], then there are at least three dis-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2



      then there exists re I such that r \ Pi for all /.                                                                                                                    tinct reduced primary decompositions of /; three such are:


 4. If     R has an identity and M u M are distinct maximal ideals in R, then show
                                                              .   .   .   ,     r
                                                                                                                                                                                  (i)   / = (x)   CI   (x\y); (ii) / = (x)                        CI   (x\x   + y);   (iii)   / = (*)   D (x\xy,y 2).
      that Mi D     M D D M = MJAr M Is this true if "maximal" is replaced
                                      2
                                          •   •   •
                                                          r
                                                                                     •
                                                                                              r.
                                                                                                                                                                     19. (a)      In the ring Z[x], the following are primary decompositions:
      by "prime"?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = (4,x) D (2,x );
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (4,2x,;c 2 )                                 2

 5. If     R has an identity, then the set of all zero divisors of R is a union of prime
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (9,3* + 3) = (3) CI (9,x + 1).
      ideals.
                                                                                                                                                                            (b)   Are the primary decompositions of part (a) reduced?
 6.   Let R have an identity. A prime ideal P in R is called a minimal prime ideal of the
      ideal I if I  P and there is no prime ideal P' such that / CI P' CP.
                              a
        (a) If an ideal / of R is contained in a prime ideal P of R, then P contains a
      minimal prime ideal of /. [Hint: Zornify the set of all prime ideals P' such that                                                                             3.     PRIMARY DECOMPOSITION
      /    Ci" C P.]                                                                                                                                                       We shall extend the results of Section 2 in a natural way to modules. A unique-
           (b)    Every proper ideal possesses at least one minimal prime ideal.                                                                                    ness statement for reduced primary decompositions (of submodules or ideals) is

 7.   The radical of an ideal / in a ring R with identity is the intersection of all its min-                                                                       proved as well as the fact that every submodule [ideal] of a Noetherian module [ring]
      imal prime ideals [see Exercise 6].                                                                                                                           has a primary decomposition. Throughout this section all rings are commutative
                                                                                                                                                                    with identity and all modules are unitary.
 8.   IfR has an identity, / is an ideal and J is a finitely generated ideal such that
      J C Rad /, then there exists a positive integer n such that J C /.
                                                                   n



 9.   What is the radical of the zero ideal in Znl                                                                                                                  Definition 3.1. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and B an R-module. A sub-
                                                                                                                                                                    module A (^ B) is primary provided that
10. If 5 is a multiplicative subset of a commutative ring                                                                      R and / is an ideal of R,
      then S-^Rad /) = Rad OS" /) in the ring S~ R.           1                                        l                                                                           r s R, b ^   A and rb e A               =>            r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B C A for some positive integer n.

11.   Let Q               R) be an ideal in R. Then Q is primary if and only if every zero divisor                                                                     EXAMPLE. Consider the ring R as an /^-module and let Q be a primary ideal
      in R/Q is nilpotent (see Exercise III. 1.1 2).                                                                                                                (and hence a submodule) of R. If rb e Q with r e R and b (?, then r n z Q for some n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                    Since Q is an ideal, this implies r n R CZ Q. Hence Q is a primary submodule of the
12. If     F is a field, then:                                                                                                                                      module R. Conversely every primary submodule of R is a primary ideal (Exercise 1).
           (a) the ideal (x,y) is maximal in F[x,y];
                                                                                                                                                                    Therefore, all results about primary submodules apply to primary ideals as well.
           (b) (x, y y                = (x\xy,y ) C (x\y) C (x,y);
                                                      2




           (c)    the ideal (x\y) is primary and the only proper prime ideal containing it
      is (x,y).                                                                                                                                                     Theorem 3.2. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and A a primary submodule
                                                                                                                                                                    of an R-module B. Then Q A = r e R rB CZ A is a primary ideal in R.
13.   In the ring Z[x,y] the ideals (a' ,>),U ,>' ),U J ),
                                                                      2              2    2        2       3
                                                                                                               -   •   •   ,   O », ... are all primary
                                                                                                                                l                                                                                      j             |                   )




      ideals belonging to the prime ideal (x,y).
                                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. Since A ^ B,                   l   R z[Q A whence Q A ^ R. If rs e Q A and s \ Q A then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,                                                                  ,



14.   The conclusion of Theorem 2.11                                            is       false if infinite intersections are allowed.                               sB       A. Consequently, for                   some b s B, sb ^ A but r(sb) e A. Since A is primary
       [Hint: consider Z.]
                                                                                                                                                                    rn   B C A for some n\ that is, r n e Q A Therefore, Q A is primary.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
384                                        CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.         PRIMARY DECOMPOSITION                                                                                                                                                                                 385



   Let R,A,B, and Q A be as in Theorem 3.2. By Theorem 2.9 Rad Q A = Pi is a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C* = A 2 fl                 Now it is easy to see that A fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •       •       •       fl              fl A k c C* and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ak       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •       •   •




prime ideal. It is easy to see that Pi = r z R r nB <Z A for some /2 >    A primary                                                 (                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          j   .                                     /*/     fl   A   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fl = C C C* for ^ > l. Conversely, if * { ^ (/ > 2), then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fl          A,'                                                                                                                                                                                                 t


submodule A of a module 5 is said to belong to a prime ideal P or to be a P-primary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r nx | Ai (otherwise r n z P since A is Pi-primary, whence r £ P since P is prime). Con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                                       {                                                                                              t                                   t


submodule of £ if P = Rad                                                                                             =        f
                                                                                                                                   r z   P       |
                                                                                                                                                     rn   5 C ^ for some n > Oj. This termi-                                                                                                                        sequently, r nx \ C, whence x \ C*. Therefore, C* (Z A fl           fl A k for k >     A                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1   .




nology is consistent with that used for ideals. In particular, if J is a primary ideal,                                                                                                                                                                                                                             similar argument shows that C* C               fl A  (1   fl     = C, so that C* = C                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '           •       •       •




then Qj = J.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (k > 1) and C* = A f)              A k (k > l). Uk = 1 then as observed above C* = B.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thus C = C* = B, which contradicts the fact that C ^ B. If k > 1, then


Definition 3.3. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and Ban R-module. A sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ^ n         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n                              = c* = c = Ai n a n                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n Ak                    ,




module Co/B has a primary decomposition ifC = Ai fl A 2 fl         fl A n w/7/z eac/z                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    whence A 2 fl                         •       •       •       fl          A k (Z A                   Y .       This conclusion contradicts the fact that the first de-
Ai a P-primary submodule ofB for some prime ideal Pi tf/R. If no Ai contains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    composition is reduced. Thus the assumption that Pi ^ P/ for every y always leads
Ai fl           •       •
                                fl    Ai_i         fl       A i+    i       fl       •       •       •
                                                                                                             fl       A„ and if the ideals Pi,                                                                           .   .   .    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P n are all distinct,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to a contradiction. Therefore Pi = P/ for some y, say j = 1.
then the primary decomposition is said to be reduced.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The proof now proceeds by induction on k. If k = 1, then we claim 5=1 also.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    For if s > 1, then the argument above with Pi = P/ and the roles of A^Ai reversed)
    Again the terminology here is consistent with that used for ideals. If C,Ai and Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    shows that B = C* = A 2 fl       fl A/, whence A/ = B for some j > 2. Thus the                             •       •       •



                                               ^ /, then P is said to be an isolated prime
are as in the definition and Pj <Z- Pi for all y                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    second decomposition of C is not reduced, a contradiction. Therefore, s = 1  = k
ideal of C. In other words, Pi is isolated if it is minimal in the set (Pi,      Pn If Pi                                                                                                                                                                         .       .       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and Ai = C = ,4/. Now assume that & > 1 and the theorem is true for all sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,       I   .




is not isolated it is said to be embedded.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    modules that have a reduced primary decomposition of less than k terms. The argu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ment of the preceding paragraph (with Pi = P/) shows that for k > 1 the sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    module C* has two reduced primary decompositions:
Theorem 3.4. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and B an R-module. If a
submodule C ofB has a primary decomposition, then C has a reduced primary decom-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a n az n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n A k = c* = a                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n           •    •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n a/.
position.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    By induction k = s, and (after reindexing) P = P/ for all /. This completes the in-                                                              t


      SKETCH OF PROOF. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 2.13. Note that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      duction and the proof of the first part of the theorem.
                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Suppose Ai and A/ are both P -primary and P                                                                                                                              is          an isolated prime. For con-
                                                    B c A], then f| Q Ai = Q nAl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t                                 t

if    qa =                       [
                                     r s   R   |
                                                   r
                                                                                                                           t=l
                                                                                                                                                                         .           Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             if       Au              .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A       r   are         all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    venience of notation assume i =                                                                                                    \.   Since Pi is isolated, there exists for each j > 2,
P-primary submodules for the same prime ideal P, then                                                                                                                                                (~)                     A is also P-primary by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r i £ Pj     — Pi. Then = r r -rk z Pj for j > 1, but ^ Pi. Since Aj is P,-primary, there
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /                    2    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /

                                                                                                                                                                                                     i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    exists for       each j > 2 an integer nj such that n *B C Aj. Similarly, for each j > 2                                                             t
Theorem 2.11.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       there is an               w such that m]B d A/. Let n = max {n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t                                                                                                                                         n k ,m 2                                                m          then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3                                                                                                                                                          2,       .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                           ,       .       .       .   ,       k\ ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t   B c Aj and nB c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t                                                    for all y > 2. Let Z) be the submodule                                                                                                                 {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xeB                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x e Cj To  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    complete the uniqueness proof we shall show                                                                                                                          A = D =     x                                                                                If                  x £ ,4i, then
Theorem 3.5. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and B an R-module. Let                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rx£^i (1 A             A k = C, whence xeD and A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2       fl              •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D.lfxe D, then r^eCC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (1                                                                                         x       C
C (VB) be a submodule ofB with two reduced primary decompositions,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Since      ^          and / \ P u we have t mB <^L A u for all m > 0. Since >4i is primary,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   is Pi-primary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    we must have x z A u (otherwise t n x z A and x \A imply t nqB CZ A for some positive                                                     x

                                                                                                         n A k = c = a/ n a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y

                                                    n a n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }


                                           Ai
                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n-                               n a.',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q by Definition 2.1). Hence D = ^i. An identical argument shows that Ai = D.
                                                                                 •       •       •                                                                                                                   •   •
                                                                2                                                                                                                    2



where Ai is P-primary and A/ is P/-primary. Then k = s and (after reordering if                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Therefore, A                  x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              = A                     x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




necessary) P = Pi' for i = 1,2,  k. Furthermore //Ai and A/ both are Pi-primary
                                      {
                                                                                                             .    .   .    ,



and Pi is an isolated prime, then A; = Ai'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thus far we have worked with a module that was assumed to have a primary de-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    composition. Now we give a partial answer to the question: which modules [ideals]
      PROOF. By changing notation if necessary we may assume that Pi is maximal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     have primary decompositions?
in the set (Pi, ...                                     ,
                                                            P*,P/,               .       .       .
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                 P,'j.             We shall first show that Pi = P/ for somey.
Suppose, on the contrary, that Pi ^ P/ for j =                                                                                                                     1,2,      .       .       .       ,       s.              Since Pi is maximal we
have Pi                         $Zl   P/       for y = 1,2,                                          .       .    .    ,   s.           Since the                      first                 decomposition                                                                    is              reduced,
Pi,P2   ,   Pk are distinct, whence Pi JZT P for i = 2,3,
            .       .       .    ,
                                                               k. By the contrapositive                                                      x                                           .       .       .           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theorem 3.6. Let R be a commutative ring with identity and B an R-module satisfy-
of Theorem 2.3, Pi       P U      U Pk U Pi' U        U P/. Consequently, there exists
                                                                        2
                                                                                                 •       •                                                 •   •   •                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A (^B) has a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ing the ascending chain condition on submodules. Then every submodule

r e Pi such that r \ P (i > 2) and r \ P/ (j > 1). Since A is Pi-primary r B C A for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                reduced primary decomposition. In particular, every submodule A (^B) of a finitely
                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                             l                                                                                                            l
                                                            x


some positive integer n. Let C* be the submodule a s B r n x z C] If k = 1, then                                                                                         (       :                               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    generated module B over a commutative Noetherian ring R and every ideal (f^R)
C = /li and hence C* = 5. We claim that for k > 1, C* - C and for £ > 1,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of R has a reduced primary decomposition.
386                                CHAPTER VIII                          COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                4.        NOETHERIAN RINGS AND MODULES                                                387


          PROOF OF 3.6. Let S be the set of all submodules of B that do not have a                                                                   9.      Let R be Noetherian and let B be an P-module. If P is a prime ideal such that
primary decomposition. Clearly no primary submodule is in S. We must show that S is                                                                          P = ann x for some nonzero x e B (see Exercise 7), then P is called an associated
actually empty. If S is nonempty, then S contains a maximal element C by Theorem                                                                             prime of B.
1.4. Since C is not primary, there exist r s R and beB — C such that rb s C but                                                                                       (a) If         B ^ 0, then there exists an associated prime of B. [Hint: use Exercise 8.]
rn B <ZL C for all n > 0. Let Bv = {x s B rn x s C| Then each P„ is a submodule of B |
                                                                                                 .                                                                    (b) If B ?±             and B satisfies the ascending chain condition on submodules, then
and ^! C fi C 5 C             By hypothesis there exists & >
                              2          3
                                                      •   •
                                                              such that B = B k for
                                                              .                                                                {                             there exist prime ideals Pi, ...                     Pr -\ and a sequence of submodules B = Bi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,                                                                 3
/  > k. Let D be the submodule |x s 5 * = r ky + c for some s P,c s Cj Clearly   |
                                                                                                          >-                       .                         B 3  2          •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                     3B = r                    such that Bi/B ^l   ^ R/P for each         {             i   < r.
C (Z. B k Pi D. Conversely, if * s 5a fl Z), then x = r ky + c and x s C, whence                                   /- fc

                                                                                                                                                 10.         Let R and B be as in Exercise 9(b). Then the following conditions on r e R are
r v = r r*y) = r *( x — c) = r*x — r*c s C. Therefore, yzB 2k = B k Consequently,
    2fc             fc(
                                                                                                                   .


                                                                                                                                                             equivalent:
r y e C and hence x = r y + c s C. Therefore B k C\ D d C, whence B k f) D = C.
 k                         k


Now C 9± B k ?± B and C ^ Z) ^ P since A e P, - C and r*P CZf C. By the maximal-             :
                                                                                                                                                                       (i)   for each             xeB there exists a positive integer n(x) such that r n(x) x = 0;
ly of Cin S, B k and D must have primary decompositions. Thus C has a primary
                                                                                                                                                                      (ii)   r lies in every associated prime of                         B (see Exercises 9 and 15).
decomposition, which is a contradiction. Therefore S is empty and every submodule                                                                11.         Let R be Noetherian, r s P, and P an P-module. Then rx =           (x zB) implies
has a primary decomposition. Consequently, every submodule has a reduced                                                                                     x =    if and only if r does not lie in any associated prime of B (see Exercises 8

primary decomposition by Theorem 3.4. The last statement of the theorem is now an                                                                            and 9).
immediate consequence of Theorems 1 .8 and 1 .9.                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                 12.         Let R be Noetherian and let B be an P-module satisfying the ascending chain
                                                                                                                                                             condition on submodules. Then the following are equivalent:
                                                                                                                                                                     There exists exactly one associated prime of B (see Exercise 9);
                                                                                                                                                                      (i)
                                                                            EXERCISES                                                                                B 5* and for each r s R one of the following is true: either rx = im-
                                                                                                                                                                      (ii)

                                                                                                                                                             plies x =      for all x s B or for each x s B there exists a positive integer n(x) such
          Note: Unless otherwise stated R is always a commutative ring with identity.
                                                                                                                                                             that r n{x) x = 0. [See Exercises 10 and 11.]
    1 .   Consider the ring R as an P-module. If Q is a primary submodule of P, then Q is
                                                                                                                                                 1   3   .   Let R and B be as in Exercise 12. Then a submodule A of B is primary if and only
          a primary ideal.
                                                                                                                                                             if   B/A has exactly one associated prime P and in that case A is P-primary; (see
    2.    (a) Let / B — D be an P-module epimorphism and C
                                   :         ->                      D) a. submodule of D.                                                                   Exercises 9 and 12).

          Then C is a primary submodule of D if and only if f~\C) is a primary submodule                                                         14.         Let R and B be as in Exercise 12. If A (^B) is a submodule of P, then every
          of B.                                                                                                                                              associated prime of A is an associated prime of B. Every associated prime of B
          (b) If              C and f~\C) are primary, then they both belong to the same prime                                                               is an associated prime of either                             A or B/A            ;       (see Exercise 9).
          ideal P.
                                                                                                                                                 15.         Let R and B be as in Exercise 12. Then the associated primes of B are precisely
    3.    IfA (^B) is a submodule of the P-module B and P is an ideal of R such that                                                                         the primes P],                   .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pn where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,            = A   Y   fl       •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fl   A n is a reduced primary de-
             (i) rx e A and x \ A (r s P,x s P) => r s P; and                                                                                                composition of                            with each A { Pi-primary. In particular, the set of associated
            (ii) r e P =>
                          n
                            P C /4 for some positive integer «,
                                          /-
                                                                                                                                                             primes of B is finite. [Hint: see Exercises 9, 13, 14.]
          then P is a prime ideal and A is a P-primary submodule of B.
                                                                                                                                                 16.         Let S be a multiplicative subset of R and let A be a P-primary submodule of an
    4.    If A is a P-primary submodule of an P-module B and rx z A (r z R,x £ 5), then                                                                      P-module B. If P fl S = 0, then S _1 /4 is an 5~ ^-primary submodule of the
          either r e P or x z A.                                                                                                                             S^P-module S^P.

    5.    IfA is a P-primary submodule of an P-module B and C is any submodule of B
          such that C    A then r £ R rC C ^ is a P-primary ideal. [Hint: Exercise 3
                                                                   j        \
                                                                                         )




          may be helpful.]
                                                                                                                                                 4.          NOETHERIAN RINGS AND MODULES
    6.    Let A be a P-primary submodule of the P-module B and let C be any submodule
                                                                                                                                                    This section consists of two independent parts. The first part deals primarily with
          of B such that C   A. Then ^ fl C is a P-primary submodule of C. [///>*/. Exer-
                                                                                                                                                 Noetherian modules (that is, modules satisfying the ascending chain condition). A
          cise 3          may be helpful.]                                                                                                       rather strong form of the Krull Intersection Theorem is proved. Nakayama's Lemma
                                                                                                                                                 and several of its interesting consequences are presented. In the second part of this
    7.    If    B is an P-module                                       and x e B, the annihilator of x,    denoted ann                 x,   is
                                                                                                                                                 section, which does not depend on the first part, we prove that if R is a commutative
          j   r £P rx =   |
                            Show that ann x is an ideal.
                                             1    .


                                                                                                                                                 Noetherian ring with identity, then so are the polynomial ring R[x u ...,*„] and the
    8.    If   B 9±               is   an P-module and P is maximal in the set of ideals ann x                 j           \
                                                                                                                                   ^ x£B    \
                                                                                                                                                 power series ring R[[x]]. With few exceptions all rings are commutative with identity.
          (see Exercise 7), then                                  P is prime.                                                                        We begin by recalling that a commutative ring R is Noetherian if and only if R
388                          CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                          4.          NOETHERIAN RINGS AND MODULES                                                            389



satisfies the            maximum condition on (two-sided) ideals (Definition 1 .2 and Theorem                                                                 PROOF. Let / be the annihilator of A in R and consider the ring 7? = R/I. De-
i .4),   or equivalently if and only if every ideal of R is finitely generated (Theorem 1 .9).                                                            note the coset r  + I e R by f. Clearly I (Z {r e R rA CZ C\ CZ P, whence P = P/I is                                   \




As a matter of fact, one need only consider prime ideals of R:                                                                                            an ideal of 7?. A and C are each P-modules with fa = ra(re R,a e A). We claim that
                                                                                                                                                          C is a primary P-submodule of A. If ra e C with r e R and a e A — C, then ra e C.
                                                                                                                                                          Since C is a primary P-submodule, r n A (Z C for some n, whence r n A (Z C and

Proposition 4.1. (/. S. Cohen). A commutative ring R with identity is Noetherian if                                                                       C is ^-primary. Since {reR\r k A (Z CJor some k_> 0} = \?z~R\r k A<ZC}
and only if every prime ideal ofR is finitely generated.                                                                                                  = {TeR\reP} = P, P is a prime ideal of R and C is a P-primary P-submodule of A
                                                                                                                                                          (see Theorems 2.9 and 3.2).
                                                                                                                                                                    Since R is Noetherian by Lemma 4.2, P is finitely generated by Theorem                                                                           1.9.
      SKETCH OF PROOF. (<=) Let S be the set of all ideals of R which are not
                                                                                                                                                          Let p u           •   •     •
                                                                                                                                                                                              p   s       (pi £ P)       be the generators of P. For each / there exists n { such that
                                               Zorn's Lemma to find a maximal ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
finitely generated. If S is nonempty, then use
                                                                                                                                                          pi  A CC. If m = ni + •+ n then it follows from Theorems III.1.2(v) and
                                                                                                                                                               ni                                                                •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s,
ment P of S. P is prime by Proposition 2.4 and hence finitely generated by hypothesis.
                                                                                                                                                                       P m A (Z C. The facts-that P = P/I and 7/4 = now imply that
                                                                                                                                                          III.2.5(vi) that
This is a contradiction unless S = 0. Therefore, R is Noetherian by Theorem
                                                                                                                                                          P m A (Z C.
1.9.



       We now develop the preliminaries needed to prove the Krull Intersection Theo-                                                                      Theorem 4.4. (Krull Intersection Jheorem). Let R be a commutative ring with
rem. If B is a module over a commutative ring P, then it is easy to see that
/ = r £ R rb =    for all b s B] is an ideal of R. The ideal / is called the annihilator
                                                                                                                                                          identity, I an ideal ofR and                                                   A a Noetherian K-module. 7/B = p| I n A, then IB = B.
         {           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               71= 1
of Bin R.
                                                                                                                                                              Theorem 4.4 was first proved in the case where R is a Noetherian local ring with
                                                                                                                                                          maximal ideal I. The proof we shall give depends on primary decomposition (as did
                                                                                                                                                          the original proof). However, if one assumes that R is Noetherian, there are a num-
Lemma 4.2. Let B be a finitely generated module over a commutative ring R with                                                                            ber of proofs that do not use primary decomposition (Exercise 2).
identity and let I be the annihilator ofB in                                              R. Then B satisfies the ascending [resp.
descending] chain condition on submodules if and only if R/I                                                              is       a Noetherian [resp.       PROOF OF 4.4. If IB = A, then A = IB (Z B, whence                                                                                         B = A = IB.    If
Artinian] ring.                                                                                                                                           IB 5* A, then by Theorem 3.6 IB has a primary decomposition:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ib = a               n a n          •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n a„
       SKETCH OF PROOF. Let B be generated by b u                                                   .   •       .
                                                                                                                    ,   bn and assume B satisfies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          x       2      .




the ascending chain condition. Then B = Rbi H             h Rb n by Theorem IV. 1 .5. Con-                                                                where each A { is a Pi-primary submodule of A for some prime ideal 7\ of R. Since
sequently, / = Ix                         D h D
                                 D /„, where 7, is the annihilator of the submodule Rbj.
                                                          •   •   •                                                                                       IB (Z B in any case, we need only show that B (Z A for every / in order to conclude                                         {


By Corollary III. 2. 27 there is a monomorphism of rings 6 R/I — R/h X            X R/h.                    :                  >          •   •   •       that B (Z IB and hence that B = IB.
It is easy to see that 6 is also an P-module                                           monomorphism. Verify that for each j the                                     Let / (1                  <       /    < s) be fixed. Suppose first that 7 (Z 7\. By Lemma 4.3 there is an
map R/ Ij — Rbj given by r + // 1—* rbj is an isomorphism of P-modules. Since the
                         >                                                                                                                                integer           m such that P m A (Z A                       {   whence B = O I n A (Z I m A (Z 7VM (Z A Now
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i9                                                             {.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
submodule Rb of B necessarily satisfies the ascending chain condition, so does /?//,-.
                             }
                                                                                                                                                          suppose 7 cj: Pi. Then there exists r e I — 7\. If B cf: ^, then there exists beB — A.
Therefore, R/I                   {       ©   •   •   •
                                                         © R/I         n   satisfies   the ascending chain condition                          on P-sub-
                                                                                                                                                          Since rb e IB                           d A u b A and A    \                                   is   primary,       rn      A (Z A for some n > 0. Conse-
modules by Corollary 1.7. Consequently its submodule Im 0^ R/I satisfies the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             {


                                                                                                                                                          quently, r £ Pi since /4 t is a Pi-primary submodule. This contradicts the choice of
ascending chain condition on P-submodules. But every ideal of the ring R/I is an
                                                                                                                                                          r £ 7       -P        t .       Therefore 7? (Z /4                             t .

P-submodule of R/I. Therefore, R/I is Noetherian.
    Conversely suppose R/I is Noetherian. Verify that B is an P/7-module with
(r + I)b = rb and that the R/I submodules of B are precisely the P-submodules.                                                                            Lemma 4.5. (Nakayama) If] is an ideal in a commutative ring R with identity, then
Consequently, B satisfies the ascending chain condition by Theorem 1.8.                                                                                   the following conditions are equivalent.

                                                                                                                                                                     (i)        J is contained in every maximal ideal ofR;
      Recall that if / is any ideal in a ring R with identity and B is an P-module, then                                                                            (ii)        1r — j is a unit for every j £ J;
IB =                                     >\ £ /; bi £ B\              n s N* \        a submodule of B (Exercise IV.1.3).
                                                                                                                                                                    (iii)7/A is a finitely generated K-module such that JA = A, then A = 0;
                 ^2 ri°i             I
                                                                                 is
                                                                                                                                                                    (iv) If'B is a submodule of a finitely generated R-module A such that A = JA
             j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 + B,
                                                                                                                                                          then       A = B.

Lemma 4.3. Let P be a prime ideal in a commutative ring R with identity. IfC is a                                                                               REMARK. The Lemma is true even when R is noncommutative, provided that
P-primary submodule of the Noetherian K-module A, then there exists a positive                                                                            (i) is      replaced by the condition that J is contained in the Jacobson radical of R
integer  such that P m A
                 m        C.                             d                                                                                                (Exercise IX.2.17).
                                                                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




390                         CHAPTER VIII                        COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                     4.            NOETHERIAN RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                 391


      PROOF OF 4.5. (i)=>(ii) if jeJ and                                              \   R - j         is      not a unit, then the ideal                                        Actually a much stronger result due to I. Kaplansky [63] is true, namely: every
(Ir — j) is not R itself (Theorem III. 3. 2) and therefore is contained in a maximal                                                                                        projective module over a (not necessarily commutative) local ring is free.
ideal   M ^ R (Theorem                                III.2.18). But \ R         - j e M and jeJ C M imply that 1* e M,
which is a contradiction. Therefore, 1# — j is a unit.                                                                                                                         PROOF OF 4.8. If P is a finitely generated projective F-module, then by
   (ii) => (iii) Since /4 is finitely generated, there must be a minimal generating set
                                                                                                                                                                            Corollary IV.2.2 there exists a free F-module F with a finite basis and an epimor-
X = (fli,   .   .a n of A (that is, no proper subset of X generates A). If A ?± 0, then
                    .   ,     \
                                                                                                                                                                            phism 7r              F — P. Among all the free F-modules F with this property choose one with
                                                                                                                                                                                              :



ai 5*     by minimality. Since X4 = ^4, a\ = j ci\ + y' 2 tf 2 +                      x
                                                                                                                  •   •   •
                                                                                                                              + y««»i 0/ e./), whence                       a basis       (   *i,x 2          ,       .       .       .           x n that has a minimal number of elements. Since ir is an epimor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


\ R a x = a x so that (1^ - j x )a x = if n = 1 and
                                                                                                                                                                            phism [t(xO,                          .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T(x n )} necessarily generate P. We shall first show that K = Ker ir

                                          (1r         — j\)ai = y   2 fl 2   H        hy w fl»          if      w >           1.
                                                                                                                                                                            is   contained in MF, where     is the unique maximal ideal of R. If K jzf MF, then                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                            there        k z K with k \ MF. Now k = nxi
                                                                                                                                                                                         exists                                      r2x 2 H   h rn x n with n e F                                                                     +
Since l /e — y"i is a unit in R, a                          Y
                                                                = (1 R —j\)~K1r — j\)ai. Thus if n = 1, then ^ =                                                            uniquely determined. Since A: \ MF, some a\, say r u is not an element of M. By Theo-
which is a contradiction. If n > 1, then a is a linear combination of a 2         a„
                                                                                  x                                                            ,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                            rem III.4.13, n is a unit, whence x                                                                                               x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   — rr k = — rrV x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •   — n~ rn xn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .    Conse-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       / n                  \       n
                         a„} generates /f, which contradicts the choice of X.
Consequently, (a 2
   (iii)
                                  ,   .   .   .
                                                  ,



           (iv) Verify that the quotient module /J/P is such that J(A/B) = A/B,
                                                                                                                                                                            quently, since k e Ker 7r, 7r(xi) = 7t(a'i                                                                                            — rr A:) = ir[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^ — rrV^ = XI —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \i = 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /   i   =2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n^7r(^).

whence A B =       and ^ = B by (iii).                                                                                                                                      Therefore, (7t(a- 2 ),                                            .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ir(x n )}                  generates P. Thus if F' is the free submodule of F with
   (iv) => (i) If            M
                    is any maximal ideal, then the ideal JR -\-     contains A/. But                                               M                                        basis    (
                                                                                                                                                                                         x->,     •   •   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          xn              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and 7r'                                   :   F' — > P the restriction of 7r to F', then 7r' is an epimor-
JR +    M ?± R (otherwise R =                                   M
                                   by (iv)). Consequently, JR -\-     =     by maxi-                                                M M                                     phism. This contradicts the choice of F as having a basis of minimal cardinality.
mally. Therefore J = JR                                 d M.                                                                                                                Hence K C MF.
                                                                                                                                                                                 Since  0^/T-^FAF^Ois exact and P is projective                       by Theorem                                                                                  K®P^F
      We now give several applications of Nakayama's Lemma, beginning with a result                                                                                         1 V.3.4.  Under this isomorphism (£,0)    A: for a\\ k e K (see the proof of Theorem


that is the starting point of the theory of completions.                                                                                                                    IV. 1.1 8), whence F is the internal direct sum F = #          F' with P'    F. Thus                                                                                 ©      ^
                                                                                                                                                                            F = K -\- P' d MF + F                                                                               ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .       If w e F, then*/           = X) w A + a with mi e M,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t                                    i? t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s F,   ^ e F'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i

                                                                                                                                                                            Consequently, in the P-module F/F',
Proposition 4.6. Let J be an ideal in a commutative ring R with identity. Then J is
contained in every maximal ideal ofR if and only if for every R-module A satisfying                                                                                                                                       «           +                                =            Z m»i +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P' =    Zi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       + n M{F/P%£



the ascending chain condition on submodule s,                                             f)   J
                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                       A = 0.                                                               whence M(F/P ) = F/P'. Since F is finitely generated, so is F/P'. Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              f


                                                                                      71= l
                                                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                            K F/P' = by Nakayama's Lemma 4.5. Thus P P' = F and F is free.                                                                                              ^
      PROOF. (=») If B = H J                                n A,
                                                                    then JB = B by Theorem 4.4. Since B is finitely
                                                        n                                                                                                                        We close this section with two well known theorems. The proofs are independent
generated by Theorem 1.9, B =       by Nakayama's Lemma 4.5.                                                                                                                of the preceding part of this chapter.
   0=) We may assume R 5* 0. If         is any maximal ideal of F, then M  5* R and                                                        M
^ = R/M is a nonzero F-module that has no proper submodules (Theorem IV. 1 .10).
Thus A trivially satisfies the ascending chain condition, whence f) J n A = by hy-
                                                                                                                                       n                                    Theorem 4.9. (Hilbert Basis Theorem) IfR is a commutative Noetherian ring with
pothesis. Since JA is a submodule of A, either JA                                                  = A or JA = 0. If JA — A, then                                           identity, then so is R[x u                                                                      .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x n ].
J n A = A for all n. Consequently, f) J n A = A ^ 0, which is a contradiction. Hence
                                                                    n
JA = 0. But                 = JA = J(R/M) implies that J CLJRCL M.                                                                                                             PROOF. Clearly it suffices to show that R[x] is Noetherian. By Theorem 1 .9 we
                                                                                                                                                                            need only show that every ideal J in R[x] is finitely generated.
                                                                                                                                                                                 For each n > 0, let /„ be the set of all r e R such that r =                                                                                                         or r is the leading co-
                                                                                                                                                                            efficient of a polynomial /e J of degree n. Verify that each                                                                                                         h is an ideal of R. If r is a
Corollary 4.7. 7/R /'s a Noetherian local ring with maximal ideal                                                                  M   ,   H M =
                                                                                                                                           n= 1
                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                       0.   nonzero element of /„ and fe J is a polynomial of degree « with leading coefficient r,
                                                                                                                                                                            then r is also the leading coefficient of xf which is a polynomial in J of degree « 1                                                                                                                        +
      PROOF. If 7 = M and A = R, then 7M = Af                                                          n       apply Proposition 4.6.
                                                                                                                                                                            Hence h CI h                              d/ d                    2                                         .       Since F is Noetherian, there exists an integer / such that
                                                                                                           ;
                                                                                                                                                                            In   = h for all n > t; furthermore, by Theorem 1 .9 each In (n > 0) is finitely generated
                                                                                                                                                                            say I n = (r nU rn2   r Tli J. For each rnj with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,  < n < t and 1 < j < /„, let /n; e 7 be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,



                                                                                                                                                                            a polynomial of degree « with leading coefficient rnj Observe that/0; = r Q] e R  R[x].                                                                .                                                 d
Proposition 4.8. IfR is a local ring, then every finitely generated projective R-mod-                                                                                       We shall show that the ideal J of R[x] is generated by the finite set of polynomials
ule is free.                                                                                                                                                                X= [fni \0 < n < t\ <j < in}-                                                              1
392                            CHAPTER VIII                         COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                              4.           NOETHERIAN RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                              393



      Clearly (X) CZ J. Conversely, the polynomials of degree                                                                                                      in J are precisely the                                 Choice). Let X         :   P — P be the map defined by h \-* /z*. Let # be any element of P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           »


elements of h and hence are contained in (X). Proceeding by induction assume that                                                                                                                                         Then by the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction (with X = fn for all «) there
(X) contains all polynomials of J of degree less than k and let g e J have degree k and                                                                                                                                   is   a function <f>    :   N — P such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >


leading coefficient r ^ 0.
      If k       < r, then r e Ik and hence r = s^i + s rk2 +                                                                                         +s r                         for   some s e P.                                                     0(0) = *                         and             </>(£        + 1) = X(«(A:)) = 4>{kY
                                                                                                                 2                                             ik kik                                            ?

                                                       ik

Therefore the polynomial                               Z Sjf                ki e (X) has             leading coefficient r and degree k. Con-                                                                             Let    0(/:)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         = h k e P[W] and denote by t kl the previously chosen elements of R

sequently, g — z2sjfkj has degree at most k —                                                                         1.          By the induction hypothesis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n                                                n

g ~    Z        Sjfkj £        W, whence g s (*).                                                                                                                                   it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hk =                 ^2 l ^ifx + xh k * = XI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i=i                                                  i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + xhk+i.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
           ;

      If k      >       r,   then r e Ik = I and r =   t
                                                                                      Z   =l
                                                                                               s J r ti( s i £                    Furthermore                                  Z
                                                                                                                                                                               ;=1
                                                                                                                                                                                         si   xk ~   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                     fti £
                                                                                      j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          For each / (1      <           < az) let ^ = 23                                                    ^IWl- Then
has leading coefficient r and degree £. Thus £ —                                                                          Z   j
                                                                                                                                          si   xk '        l

                                                                                                                                                           fti         nas degree at most
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /                                                                  £



k —   and lies in (X) by the induction assumption. Consequently, g s (X) and the in-
        1

duction is complete. Therefore, J = (X).                                                                                                                                                                                                   glfl+-"+gnfn =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z vZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =o             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =     Z V=l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z ^/V"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (




Proposition 4.10. IfR is a commutative Noetherian ring with identity, then so is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E& -                      xh k+l )x k        .




R[[x]].                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Consequently, for each w >                                          the coefficient of x m in gif                                     x   +   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    + gn fn is   the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m
      REMARK. Our proof makes use of Proposition 4.1. Although we shall not do                                                                                                                                            as the coefficient of x m in                          J3                    — xh k+ i)x k Since        .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A-   =
so, the technique used to prove Theorem 4.9 may also be used here, with                                                                                                                             nonzero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m
coefficients of lowest degree replacing those of highest degree in the argument. How-
ever, great care  must be used to insure that certain power                                                                                                    series constructed in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k=o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (^a            — xh k+ i)x = h — x m+l h m+ = g — x m+1 hm^u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Q                               i




ductively in the course of the proof are in fact validly defined. The Axiom of Choice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the coefficient of x m in f g                          +        •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  + .Ug^               is precisely the coefficient                                  of x m in g. There-
and some version of the Recursion Theorem are necessary (this part is frequently                                                                                                                                                                                        x   Y



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fore, g = £1/, + £2/2 H                                        h^n/B and/i                                      /„   generate P.
obscured in many published proofs of Proposition 4.10).


      PROOF OF 4.10. It suffices by Proposition 4.1 to prove that every prime ideal
P in R[[x]] is finitely generated. Define an epimbrphism of rings R[[x]] — R by                                                                                                                              >                                                                                        EXERCISES
mapping each power series / =
                                =
                                     x%      i ts constant term a
                                                                    Z a onto
                                                                  Let P* be the image
                                                                                  ^                                                                                .                                                      1.   Let R be a commutative ring with identity and / a finitely generated ideal of R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Let C be a submodule of an /^-module A Assume that for each r e 1 there exists a
                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

of P under this map. Then P* is a finitely generated ideal in R (Exercise III.2.13 and
Theorem .9), say P* = (r u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               positive integer          m (depending on r) such that r m A d C. Show that for some
                                                                             r n ). For each r choose f eP with constant term n.
      If
                    1


               x e P, we claim that P
                                                            .   .   .
                                                                        ,



                                                                        is       generated by
                                                                                                           x



                                                                                                                     ru   .       .       .
                                                                                                                                               t


                                                                                                                                                      rn ,x.           First             note that                   if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               integer /z, I n A     C C.               [///«/.-          see Theorems III.1.2(v) and III.2.5(vi)].
                                                                                                                                              ,




fk   = rk +             Z
                        i=l
                                             then      rk       = fk - x[                  Z
                                                                                          \j=0
                                                                                                    a,+ix') z p
                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                  If           g =         Z= ^ zP then
                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.   Without using primary decomposition, prove this version of the Krull Inter-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               section Theorem. If R is a commutative Noetherian ring with identity, / an ideal
                                                                                                                                                               n
bo   = siri +                  + sn r        n   for   some s e R. Consequently, £ —
                                                                             x                                                                    Z                                 has             constant                   of P, A a finitely generated P-module, and B =                                                                           f)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       71= 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I n A,       then IB = B. [Hints:

term; that is, g —                       Z       s^i   =                    (#, e /?[[*]]).            Therefore                              g = Z ^ +                5                           and p is                    Let C be maximal in the set CS of all submodules S of A such that B fl S = IB. It
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               suffices to show          PM CI C for some m. By Exercise                                                                  1    it   suffices to show that for
generated by n,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               each re /, r n A CI C for some az (depending on r). For each A', let D k = \aeA\r k aeC}.
                                 .   .   .
                                             ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D CZ A CZ D CZ        is an ascending chain of P-submodules; hence for some
      If x £ P,              we claim that Pis generated by                                                               /n s P. If A = J] c,* e P, then
                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A7,

                                                                                                                                                           n                   i   =                                           D = D n for all k > n. Show that (rM + C) fl P = /P. The maximality of C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k

Co   = /i^i +                  + n rn for some
                                     t                                  /,   s R.         Consequently, h —                                            Z=
                                                                                                                                                       i       i
                                                                                                                                                                               =                   f° r          some          implies r n A + C = C, that is, rM CZ C]

/z* e R[[x]].            Since x £ P and xh* = h — ^2 ufi e P and P is prime, we have /z* e P.                                                                                                                            3.   Let    be a Noetherian local ring with maximal ideal M. If the ideal       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in                                                                               M/M
For each /z e P, choose ti e P and /z* e P such that /z =                                                                                         Z                ^ + x/z* (Axiom of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R/M   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  by x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is generated   +    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a n + 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }, then the ideal  is generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,    .   .   .    ,                 M                                           M
                                                                                                                                                  i   =i                                                                       in /? by {«!,...  a„}.      ,
394                     CHAPTER VIII          COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                5.     RING EXTENSIONS                                                                                                                                             395



4.    (Nakayama's Lemma, second version) Let R be a commutative ring with identity,                                      Definition 5.2. Let S be an extension ring ofK and s e S. // there exists a monic
      J an ideal that is contained in every maximal ideal of and A a finitely generated                                  polynomial f(x) £ R[x] such that s is a root off {that is, f(s) = 0), then s is said to be
      fl-module. If R/J              ®
                              R A = 0, then A = 0. [Hint: use the exact sequence                                         integral over R. If every element ofS is integral over R, S is said to be an integral ex-

        —>/ —> R —*        —* and the natural isomorphism fl (x)* ,4        ^ to show           =                        tension ofR.

      JA     -   /I.]

                                                                                                                               The key feature of Definition 5.2 is the requirement that /be monic.
5.    Let fl and 7 be as in Exercise 4; let A be a finitely generated /^-module and
      f C —> A an fl-module homomorphism. Then / induces a homomorphism
        :




      / C//C —
        :               »           in the usual way (Corollary I V.l .8). Show that if /is an epimor-                      EXAMPLES. Every algebraic extension field F of a field is an integral exten-                                                                                                               K
      phism, then /is an epimorphism.                                                                                    sion ring (see the Remarks after Definition V.l. 4). The ring R is integral over itself
                                                                                                                         since r e R is a root of x- r e R[x]. In the extension of Z by the real field R, /-\J3 is                                                                                                                                                        1

6.    (a) Let R be a commutative ring with identity. If every ideal of R can be generated                                algebraic over Z since it is a root of 3x — but \/y[3 is not integral over Z. How-                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1

      by a finite or denumerable subset, then the same is true of R[x].                                                  ever, 1/^3 is integral over the rational field Q since it is a root of x — 1/3.                                                                                                                                        2


      (b) State and prove an analogue of part (a) for R[[x]]; (the answer is not quite                                         Let 5 be an extension ring of R and                                                                            X a subset of S. Then the subring generated by
      the same here).                                                                                                    X over R is the intersection of all subrings of 5 that contain U R\ it is denoted                                                                                                                 X
                                                                                                                         R[X]. The first half of Theorem V.l. 3 is valid for rings and shows that /^con-
7.    Let R be a commutative ring with identity and let fg e R[[x]]. Denote by In /, the                                 sists   of all elements f(s u                                                 .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sn )   with n e N*, fe R[xi, ...,*„] and s { eX. In par-
                                                                                                                         ticular, for any s u                                                 s t eS the subring generated by                                                                          su                      s ]          over R, which is
      initial degree of / (that is, the smallest n such that a„ ^ 0, where / =
                                                                                                                                                                      .   .   .                                                                                                                              .     .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                                                                            {                       ,       t




                                                                                                            i   =        denoted R[s u                .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                      s t ], consists of all elements f(s u                                            x ]. An                     .   .   .   ,       s t ) with          / e R[x u                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,           t



      Show that                                                                                                          element of R[s u                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                              s t ] is               sometimes called a polynomial in s u      s Despite this                                                                  .   .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,       t .



           (a)  In(/+g) > min(In/ Ing).                                                                                  terminology R[s u                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                  st]              need not be isomorphic to the polynomial ring R[x u      x                                                                                                             .   .       .   ,    t]



           (b)  In(/*)>In/+ Ing.                                                                                         (for example, f(s u                          .   .  may be zero even though /is a nonzero polynomial). It is
                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                              s )
                                                                                                                                                                                               t




            (c) If R is an integral domain, In (fg) = In /+ In g.                                                        easy to see that                             for each / (1 < / < /), R[s u    5<_i][j = R[s u     jj. Since                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,                     t-]                            .     .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                         R[s u   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                  s t ] is a ring containing R, R[s u                                                             .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s ] is an /^-module in the obvious way.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t




8.    Let R be a commutative Noetherian ring with identity and let Q f)   fl (9 =           x
                                                                                                •   •   •
                                                                                                                    ri    Likewise every module over R[s u                                                                        .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s t ] is obviously an /^-module.
      be a reduced primary decomposition of the ideal of R with Q { belonging to the
      prime ideal P». Then P             T   U P U
                                               2
                                                     •   •   •
                                                                 U Pn is the set of zero divisors in R.

9.    Let R be a commutative ring with identity. If every maximal ideal of R is of the                                   Theorem 5.3. Le/ S be an extension ring ofR and s e S. Then the following conditions
      form (c), where c         2    = r, for some c e fl, then R is Noetherian. [Hint: show that                        are equivalent.

      every primary ideal is maximal; use Proposition 4.1.]
                                                                                                                                 (i)         s is   integral over R;
                                                                                                                                (ii)         R[s] is a finitely generated R-module;
                                                                                                                               (iii)         there is a subring T 6>/S containing 1 s fl^R[s] which is finitely generated as an
                                                                                                                         R-module;
5.    RING EXTENSIONS                                                                                                          (iv) there is an                       R[s]-submodule BofS which is finitely generated as an R-module
                                                                                                                         and whose annihilator in R[s] is zero.
      In the       first    part of this section ring extensions are defined                and the essential
properties of integral extensions are developed. The last part is devoted to the study
of the relations between prime ideals in rings R and 5, where S is an extension ring of
                                                                                                                             SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) =^> (ii) Suppose s is a root of the monic polynomial
                                                                                                                         /e R[x] of degree n. We claim that 1/e = s°,s,s 2              ~
R. Throughout this section all rings are commutative with identity.                                                                                                                  sn   generate R[s] as an                                                                      ,   .   .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l



                                                                                                                         /^-module. As observed above, every element of R[s] is of the form g(s) for some
                                                                                                                         g £ R[x]. By the Division Algorithm III.6.2 g(x) = f(x)q(x) + r(x) with deg r < deg/.
                                                                                                                         Therefore in 5, #(s) = f(s)q(s)     r(s) =    r(j) = r(s). Hence g(s) is an tf-linear             +                              +
Definition 5.1. Let S be a commutative ring with identity and R a subring ofS con-                                       combination of \ R ,s,s 2    s
                                                                                                                                                        m with m = deg r
                                                                                                                                                                            deg/= ,       .    .   .       ,                                                               <
taining Is. Then S is said to be an extension ring ofR.                                                                        (ii) => (iii)              Let 7" = R[s].
                                                                                                                               (iii) => (iv)              Let B be the subring T. Since                                                                                        d       fl[s]               d T, B                  is       an fl^-module
      EXAMPLES. Every extension field F of a field K is obviously an extension ring                                      that is finitely generated as an fl-module by (iii). Since                                                                                                                l s      £ B,           uB =               for any ueS
of K. If R is a commutative ring with identity, then R[[x]] and R[x u ...,*„] are ex-                                    implies u = u\ s  = 0; that is, the annihilator of B in     is 0.

tension rings of R. The ring Z is not an extension of the subring E of even integers                                                   Let £ be generated over R by b u
                                                                                                                               (iv) => (i)                                       b n Since £ is an A[j]-module                                                             .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,           .




since       E does not contain 1.                                                                                        sb s 5 for each /. Therefore there exist rr; £ R such that
                                                                                                                           t
396                                          CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                         5.          RING EXTENSIONS                                                                                                                           397



                                                                      sbi        = r u bi + r b +                      i2       2
                                                                                                                                                  •   -
                                                                                                                                                               +r b    Xri       n                                             Theorem 5.6. IfT is an integral extension ring ofS and S is an integral extension
                                                                      sb 2       = r \bi + r22 b +
                                                                                        2                                       2
                                                                                                                                                  •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                               +r b    2n        n                                             ring ofR, then T is an integral extension ring ofR.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PROOF. Tis obviously an extension ring of R. If                                                                                   /    e   T then / is integral over S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n

                                                                      sb n       = rn ibi + rn2 b +                             2                 •   •    •
                                                                                                                                                               + r„ b„. n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and therefore the root of some monic polynomial feS[x], say / = 2^ SiX\ Since /is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i   =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               also a polynomial over the ring /*[j ,Ji,                                •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,   J„-i],              /       is          integral over R[s                      ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j n _i].
Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               By Theorem 5.3 /?[j     ,   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s n -i][t] is a finitely generated R[s ,                                                                      .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5 n _i]-module. But

                                                                 (r n      - s)bi + r ,b H                    l2        2                                 h r Xv b n             =                                             since S is integral over R, R[s 0i               .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sn _i] is a finitely generated /^-module by Theorem

                                                                  r 2 ibi   + (r — s)b H     22                         2                                 h r 2 ,A               =                                             5.5. The remarks preceding Theorem 5.5                                           show that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R[s 0f   .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jn -l][/]       = R[s                       ,   .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,       J„_l,/]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               is    a finitely generated /^-module. Since R[t]                                             C /?[j                  ,       .       .    -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   s„-i,t],          t   is integral             over R
                                                             r n \bi         + r^.fo H                                          h (r„ n - •*)&„                                  = 0.                                          by Theorem 5.3(iii).

LetM be the n X « matrix          and let ^/s        be the determinant of the matrix
                                                                                 (ri})

M — Then = for
            sln      .             by Exercise VII. 3. 8. Since B is generated by the
                                                  dfo                            all    /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 5.7. Let S be an extension ring ofR and let R be the set of all elements ofS
    dB = 0. Since the annihilator of B in R[s] is zero by (iv) we must have d = 0. If /                                                                                                                                        that are integral overR. Then R is an integral extension ring ofR which contains every
is the polynomial \M — xln in R[x] then one of /, — / is monic and                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               subring ofS that is integral over R.
                                                                             \




                                                                      ± f(s) = ±\M - slv = ±d = 0.                                            \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PROOF. If s,t e R, then s,t e R[s,t], whence t - s e R[s,t] and ts e R[s,t]. Since s
Therefore s is integral over R.                                                                                                                                                                                                and t are integral over R, so is the ring R[s,t] (Theorem 5.5). Therefore t — ssR and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ts e R. Consequently, R is a subring of S (see Theorem 1.2.5). R contains R since

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               every element of R is trivially integral over R. The definition of R insures that R is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               integral over R and contains all subrings of S that are integral over R.
Corollary 5.4. //S zs a ring^ extension ofR andS is finitely generated as an R-module,
then S is an integral extension ofR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     If S is an extension ring of R, then the ring                                                  R of Theorem 5.7 is called the integral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               closure of R in S. If R         = R, then R is said to be integrally closed in S.
      PROOF. For any s e S let S = Tin part (iii) of Theorem 5.3. Then s is integral
over R by Theorem 5.3(i).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  REMARKS, (i) Since R e R C R S is an extension ring of R. Theorems 5.6 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \                            f


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5.7 imply that  R is itself integrally closed in S. (ii) The concepts of integral closure
      The proofs of the next propositions depend on the following fact. If R C 5 C T                                                                                                                                           and integrally closed rings are relative notions and refer to a given ring R and a par-
are rings (with \ T e R) such that Tis a finitely generated S-module and S is a finitely                                                                                                                                       ticular extension ring S. Thus the phrase "R is integrally closed" is ambiguous unless
generated /^-module, then Tis a finitely generated /^-module. The second paragraph                                                                                                                                             an extension ring S is specified. There is one case, however, in which the ring S is
of the proof of Theorem IV.2.16 contains a proof of this fact, mutatis mutandis.                                                                                                                                               understood without specific mention. An integral domain R is said to be integrally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               closed provided R is integrally closed in its quotient field (see p. 144).



Theorem 5.5. If S is an extension ring ofR and Si,                                                                                                                 .    .    .       ,   st e S         are integral over R,         EXAMPLE. The integral domain Z is integrally closed (in the rational field Q;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Exercise 8). However, Z is not integrally closed in the field C of complex numbers
then R[ji,                   .   .       .
                                             , s t]
                                                    is a finitely generated R-module                                                                           and an integral extension ring ofR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               since / e C is integral over Z.

      PROOF. We have a tower of extension rings:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXAMPLE. More generally, every unique factorization domain is integrally
                                                        R C R[s                  Y]    C R[s u s C                 2]
                                                                                                                                         •            C R[s u                -       -   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 s ].
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               closed (Exercise 8). In particular, the polynomial ring F[x u ...,*„] (Fa field) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               integrally closed in its quotient field F(x u                                    .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a„).
For each /, s                                t   is   integral over                     R and hence integral over R[s u                                                                                   .   .   .   Since          The following theorem is used only in the proof of Theorem 6.10.
R[s u   •   •    •
                         ,   Si]             = R[s u     .   .    .
                                                                      ,   Jt-i][jf],          R[s u                .    .   .
                                                                                                                                    ,   Si]           is       a finitely generated module over
R[s u   •   •    by Theorem 5.3 (i), (ii). Repeated application of the remarks preced-
                 -
                         ,   Jt-i]

ing the theorem shows that R[s u         s n is a finitely generated ^-module. Therefore,.    .   .
                                                                                                          ,        ]                                                                                                           Theorem 5.8. Let T be a multiplicative subset of an integral domain R such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    _1
R[s u   .  s n is an integral extension ring of
             .   .
                         ,           ]
                                                      by Corollary 5.4.                                                                                                                                                          T. IfR is integrally closed, then T R is an integrally closed integral domain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                if
398                    CHAPTER VIII                     COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                             5.         RING EXTENSIONS                                                              399


      SKETCH OF PROOF. T~ R is an integral domain (Theorem III.4.3(ii)) and R
                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                                Corollary 5.10. (Going-up Theorem) Let S be an integral extension ring ofR and P u
may be identified with a subring of T~ R (Theorem III.4.4(ii)). Extending this identi-
                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                P prime ideals in R such that Pi CZ P. IfQ is a prime ideal of S lying over P u then there
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y



fication, the quotient field Q(R) of R may be considered as a subfield of the quotient                                                                          exists a prime ideal              QofS such that Qi CI Q and Q lies over P.
field Q(T~ R) of T R. Verify that Q(R) = Q(T~ R).
                   l                 l                                                               l



      Let u s Q(T^ l R) be integral over T~ l R\ then for some r                                                     r     z       R and Si z T,                    SKETCH OF PROOF. As in the proof of Theorem 5.9, R - P is a multiplica-
                                                                                                                                                                tive set in 5. Since  Q D R = P c P, we have (?i fl (P - P) - 0. By Theorem
                                                                                                                                                                                                   x                    x

                         u   n
                                 + (r^i/Sn^u"- H                    1
                                                                                            h (n/sOu        + (r /s = 0.       )
                                                                                                                                                                2.2 there is a prime ideal Q of 5 that contains Q and is maximal in the set of all ideals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y


                                                                                                                                                                / of S such that Q CZ I and / fl (R - P) = 0. The proof of Theorem 5.9 now
Multiply through this equation by s n where s = s sr                        ,
                                                                                                             •   -sn ._i z T,         and conclude that                                       x



                                                                                                                                                                carries over verbatim to show that Q D R = P.
su is integral over R. Since su z Q(T~ l R) =                                                Q(R) and P is integrally closed, s« £ R.
                                            _1
Therefore, u = su/s z P                          P, whence T~ l R is integrally closed.

                                                                                                                                                                Theorem 5.11. Let S be an integral extension ring ofR and P a prime ideal in R. IfQ
   The remainder of this section is devoted to exploring the relationships between                                                                              and Q' are prime ideals in S such that                                   QCQ' a//^ both Q                         Q   ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          //£>   over P, //z^
(prime) ideals in rings R and 5, where S is an extension ring of R. The only point in
                                                                                                                                                                Q - Q     ;
                                                                                                                                                                              .



the sequel where this material is used is in the proof of Lemma 7.3.
      If S is an extension ring of                        R and / (^S) is an ideal' of 5, it is easy to see that                                                   PROOF. It suffices to prove the following statement: if Q is a prime ideal in S
/   D R    R and / D R is an ideal of R (Exercise 10). The ideal J = I f) Ris called                                                                            such that Q  D R = P, then    is maximal in the set S of all ideals / in S with the
the contraction of / to R and / is said to lie over J.                                                                                                          property / fl (R - P) = 0.
    If Q is a prime ideal in an extension ring 5 of a ring R, then the contraction                                                                                   If (? is not maximal in S, then there is an ideal / in S with
Q D R of Q to R is a prime ideal of R (Exercise 10). The converse problem is: given
a prime ideal P in R does there exist a prime ideal Q in S that lies over P (that is,                                                                                                                   2C/ and /                            fl   (R - P) = 0.
Q D R = P)? There are many examples where the answer is negative (for example,
the extension of Z by the field                          Q of rationals). A partial solution to the problem is                                                  Consequently, I f)            R d P. Choose u z I - Q. Since u is integral over P, the set of
given by the next theorem, which is due to Cohen-Seidenberg.                                                                                                    all monic polynomials           / £ R[x] such that deg / > and f(u) z Q is nonempty. Choose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                such an / of least degree, say f =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nxi. Then


Theorem 5.9. (Lying-over Theorem) Let S be an integral extension ring ofR and P a                                                                                                                  un   + r ^u n ~ H
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h nu        +r   £   Q CI /,
prime ideal ofR. Then there exists a prime ideal Q in S which lies over P (that is,                                                                             whence        /-
                                                                                                                                                                                   £/ (1 /?   CP =                f]             C ^ Therefore
q n r = p).                                                                                                                                                                                        w^- + r„_,w w - H
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h r2 w   + r,)    e   Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "1                    n -2
                                                                                                                                                                By the minimality of deg /, (w                     71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 + r ^u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n               H        h r ) \ Q,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   {            and « ^ Q by choice.
    PROOF. Since P is prime, R — P is a multiplicative subset of R (Theorem 2.1)                                                                                This is a contradiction since (? is prime (Theorem IIL2.15). Therefore Q is maximal
and hence a multiplicative subset of S. Clearly ^ R — P. By Theorem 2.2 there is an                                                                             in 5.
ideal Q of S that is maximal in the set of all ideals / of S such that / D (R — P) =                                                                        ;



furthermore any such ideal Q is prime in S. Clearly Q f) R CZ P. Jf Q f) R ^ P,
choose u £ P such that w | (9. Then the ideal Q + (w) in 5 properly contains Q. By                                                                              Theorem 5.12. Let S be an integral extension ring ofR and let Qbea prime ideal in S
maximality there exists c z(Q + (u)) D (R — P), say c = # +               £ Q ;s z S). Since                                          (<y                       which lies over a prime ideal P in R. Then Q /s maximal in S if and only ifP is maximal
s is integral over P, there exist n z R such that                                                                                                               in   R.

                                             s
                                                 Tl
                                                      + av-iS - +
                                                               71       1
                                                                                •   •   •
                                                                                            + ns + r = 0.                                                           PROOF. Suppose Q is maximal in S. By Theorem IIL2.18 there is a maximal
Multiplying this equation by « n yields
                                                                                                                                                                ideal M of R that contains P. M is prime by Theorem III.2.19. By Corollary 5.10
                                                                                                                                                                there is a prime ideal Q' in S such that £ CI Q' and (?' lies over M. Since is prime,
                                                                                                                                                                Q' j£ S (Definition III.2.14). The maximality of Q implies that Q = (?', whence
                         (su) n           + av,.^")                                                 n_1
                                                                                                          (^) + row                = 0.
                                                              71-1                                                            71
                                                                        H                   h ri«
                                                                                                                                                                P=Qf)R = Q'f)R = M. Therefore, P            is maximal in R.

Since su = c — q the Binomial Theorem III. 1.6 implies that                                                                                                        Conversely suppose P is maximal in R. Since O is prime in S,Q ^ S and there is
                                                                                                                                                                a maximal ideal          N
                                                                                                                                                                                   of S containing Q (Theorem III.2.18).     is prime by Theorem                           N
                                 v       = e n + r n _iuc n ~ +         l
                                                                                            + riw n_1 c + row £ 0.       71
                                                                                                                                                                III.2.19,          whence \ R - l s { TV. Since P^PfleczPflTVeP, we must have

But    i?   £ /?   and hence v z R fl                    Q CI P. But w £ P and c £ P imply                                                  £ P.   Since P is   P - P fl TV by maximality. Thus Q and TV both lie over P and Q CZ N. Therefore,
prime, c must lie in P, which is a contradiction.                                                                                                               Q = TV by Theorem 5.11.
                                                                                      »




400                   CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                            6.     DEDEKIND DOMAINS                                                             401



                                                      EXERCISES                                                                                           The definition of a Dedekind domain to be given below is motivated by the
                                                                                                                                                 following facts. Every principal ideal domain                                              D is Noetherian (Lemma III.3.6). Con-
      Note: Unless otherwise specified, S is always an extension ring of R.
                                                                                                                                                 sequently, every ideal (^ D) has a primary decomposition (Theorem 3.6). The intro-

 1.   Let S be an integral extension ring of R and suppose R and S are integral do-                                                              duction to Section 2 shows that a particularly strong form of primary decomposition
      mains. Then 5 is a field if and only if R is a field. [Hint: Corollary III.2.21.]                                                          holds in a principal ideal domain, namely: every proper ideal is (uniquely) a prod-
                                                                                                                                                 uct of prime ideals.
 2.   Let R be an integral domain. If the quotient field F of R is integral over R, then
      R is a field.
 3.   Let R be an integral domain with quotient field F. If                                                ^ a e R and     l   R /azFis          Definition 6.1. A Dedekind domain is an integral domain R in which every ideal (^ R)
      integral over R, then a is a unit in /?.                                                                                                   is   the product of a finite number of prime ideals.

 4. (a)      Let /? be an integral domain with quotient field F. If                                                 ^ a e /?, then the
                                                                                                                                                          EXAMPLE. The preceding discussion shows that every principal ideal domain
      following are equivalent:
                                                                                                                                                is Dedekind.  The converse, however, is false. There is an example after Theorem 6.10
            (i)    every nonzero prime ideal of R contains a;                                                                                   below of a Dedekind domain that is not a principal ideal domain.
             every nonzero ideal of R contains some power of a\
            (ii)                                                                                                                                   It is not immediately evident from the definition that every Dedekind domain is

             F = R[\ R /a] (ring extension).
         (iii)                                                                                                                                  in fact Noetherian. In order to prove this fact and to develop other properties of

      An integral domain R that contains an element a ^ satisfying (i)-(iii) is called                                                          Dedekind domains we must introduce the concept of a fractional ideal.
      a Goldmann ring.

      (b)    A principal ideal domain is a Goldmann ring if and only if it has only finitely                                                    Definition 6.2. Let R be an integral domain with quotient field K. A fractional ideal
      many distinct primes.                                                                                                                     ofR is a nonzero R-submodule I o/K such that al C R for some nonzero a e R.
      (c)    Is the   homomorphic image of a Goldmann ring also a Goldmann ring?

 5.   If S is an integral extension ring of                R and / S — S is a ring homomorphism,
                                                                      :                                                                             EXAMPLE. Every ordinary nonzero ideal / in an integral domain R is an ^-sub-
      such that /(l s ) =                Is, then f(S) is an integral extension ring of f{R).                                                   module of R and hence a fractional ideal of R. Conversely, every fractional ideal of R
                                                                                                                                                that is contained in R is an ordinary ideal of R.
 6.   If 5 is an integral extension ring of /?, then S[x u                    .   .   .
                                                                                              ,   xv   ]   is   an integral extension
      ring of R[xi,      .   .   .
                                     ,
                                         x n ].
                                                                                                                                                          EXAMPLE. Every nonzero finitely generated /?-submodule / of K is a fractional
 7. If  S is an integral extension ring of R and Tis a multiplicative subset of R (0 \ T),                                                      ideal of R. For if / is generated by b u                                 .   .   .       b n e K, then / = Rb\ -\                       Rbn and for
      then T^S is an integral extension of T^R. [Hint: If s/teT^S, then s/t =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                                             f-

                                                                                                                                                each         /,   bi   = c -/a      -
                                                                                                                                                                                        with          ^ a              c t e R.           Let a = a a2    -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -an           Then a ^       and
                   WX
                                                                                                                                                                             t      t                             {,                                  Y                 .



      07<j)(       where 0r 5 -> T^S is the canonical map (Theorem III.4.4). Show
                                                  :
                                                                                                                                                al = Ra2          -    -a n Ci -\                 Rai   -    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -an ^c n        C R.
                                                                                                                                                                                             f-

              <M» and U/7 are integral over T~ R, whence s/t is integral over T~ R by
                                                              l                                                                   Y
      that
      Theorem 5.5.]                                                                                                                                 REMARK. If /is a fractional ideal of a domain R and al CI R (0 =^ a e R), then
 8.   Every unique factorization domain is integrally closed. [Hint: Proposition                                                                al is an ordinary ideal in R and the map / -» al given by x |-> ax is an /?-module
      III.6.8.]                                                                                                                                 isomorphism.

 9.   Let T be a commutative ring with identity and {S i e /}       Ri / e /| families of
                                                                                  {       \                ,    {   |




      subrings such that Tis an extension ring of S and Si is an extension ring of Ri for
                                                                  {

                                                                                                                                                Theorem 6.3. IfR is an integral domain with quotient field K, then the set of all
      every /. If each Ri is integrally closed in Si, then f) ^» is integrally closed in                                          Q       Si-
                                                                          i                                                           i         fractional ideals ofR forms a commutative monoid, with identity and multiplication                                          R
10. (a) If / (^5) is   an ideal of S, then I f) R 9* R and I f) R is an ideal of /?.                                                            given by IJ            =                a^        aj e I; bj e J; n.e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N*J.
      (b) If Q is a prime ideal of 5, then Q f) R is a prime ideal of /?.
                                                                                                                                                                                             |




                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. Exercise; note that if /and J are ideals in R, then //is the usual product
                                                                                                                                                of ideals.
6.    DEDEKIND DOMAINS
   In this section we examine the class of Dedekind domains. It lies properly be-
                                                                                                                                                    A fractional ideal / of an integral domain R is said to be invertible if U = R for
tween the class of principal ideal domains and the class of Noetherian integral
                                                                                                                                                some fractional ideal J of R. Thus the invertible fractional ideals 2 are precisely those
                                                                                                                                                that have inverses in the monoid of all fractional ideals.
domains. Dedekind domains are important in algebraic number theory and the
                        The chief result is Theorem 6.10 which characterizes
algebraic theory of curves.
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                          In the literature invertible fractional ideals are sometimes called simply invertible ideals.
Dedekind domains in several different ways.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




402                                                 CHAPTER VIII                                       COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                              6.   DEDEKIND DOMAINS                                                                                       403


         REMARKS, (i) The inverse of an invertible fractional ideal / is unique and is                                                                                                                                                                               Since ker ir = P  C P, and P C & for each the ideals ir(Pi) and ir(Q ) are prime in  /,                                                        l

/- 1 =          \aeK\aICZ P). Indeed for any fractional ideal / the set I                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              =   {   a e K al     \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CP               |    R/P (Exercise 111.2.17(a)). Since R/P is an integral domain (Theorem III. 2.1 6), every
is easily seen to be a fractional ideal such that 7                                                    C P. If / is invertible and                    _1
                                                                                                                                                           7    = II         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     principal ideal in R/P is invertible (see the example preceding Lemma 6.4). Con-
IJ = JI = P, then clearly J     7                                                              C                _1
                                                                                                      and 7 are P-submodules of
                                                                                                                     .       Conversely, since 7
                                                                                                                                                                        _1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sequently, 7r(Pt ) and tt(Qj) are invertible by Lemma 6.4(i). Since
K, /- 1 = RI- 1 = {JI)I~ l = All' 1 )                                          C JR = RJ C /, whence J = I \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tt(Qi)-                ir(Q n ) = (Tr(^)) = Wfl ))2 =                                             p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mv( m y
                                                            are fractional ideals of P such that 7/1 = IB and 7 is invertible, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
          (ii)      If
A = RA = (I~ I)A = r\IE) = RB = B.                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lemma 6.4(ii) implies n = 2m and (after reindexing) 7r(P ) = ir(Q ) = Tv(Q -i) for                                t                   2i                         2i

         (iii)      If 7 is an ordinary ideal in P, then                                                                                       R C 7_1              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /= 1,2,     m. Since Ker w = P C P and P C £?, for all /,/,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .   .   .   ,                                                 {



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pi   = T-Kw(Pi)) = 7r-Kir(Q )) = G«
         EXAMPLE. Every nonzero principal ideal in an integral domain R is invertible.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2l


If      K is the quotient field of R and 7 = (A) with 6 ^ 0, let J = Rc C K where c =                                                                                                                                                              1 R /b.          and similarly P, = Q 2l _i for # = 1,2, m. Consequently, P + Ra 2 = (P + Pa) 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .   .   .   ,



Then 7 is a fractional ideal of R such that 77 = R.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 and P C P + Pa 2 C (P + Pa) 2 C P 2 + Pa. If A = c +        £ P (c e P ,r e P), then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2


         Invertible fractional ideals play a key role in characterizing Dedekind domains.                                                                                                                                                                           ra s P. Thus reP since P is prime and a\P. Therefore, P CI P 2 + Pa CZ P, which
The next five results develop some facts about them.                                                                                                                                                                                                                implies P = P2 + Pa = P(P + Pa). Since P is invertible, R = P~ P = P-*P(P + Pa)                                                   l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = P(P + Pa) = P + Pa. This is a contradiction. Therefore every invertible prime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ideal   P is maximal.
Lemma 6.4. Let I, Ii, I                                                           2,   .   .   .       ,
                                                                                                               I„    be ideals in an integral domain R.                                                                                                                 Now suppose P is any nonzero prime ideal in P and c is a nonzero element of P.
                                                                              -I n is invertible if and only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Then (c) = PiP2    Pn for some prime ideals P Since PiP2 Pn = (c) C P, we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •   •   •


          (i)       The ideal Iil 2                                   -   •
                                                                                                                                                                if each l                        is invertible.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P* C P (Definition III.2.14). The principal ideal (c) is invertible and
                                                                                                                                                                                         }

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for some
         (ii)       If Pr                       •
                                                        P m = I = Qr                                       •
                                                                                                                Q„, where the Pi and Qj are prime ideals in R and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hence so is Pk (Lemma 6.4(i)). By the first part of the proof Pk is maximal, whence
every Pi is invertible, then                                                       m = n and (after reindexing) Pi = Qi for each                                                                                       i   = 1         ,   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .       ,   m.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pk = P. Therefore, P is maximal and invertible.

    PROOF, (i) If J is a fractional ideal such that Ah -In) = &, then for each                                                                                                   -




j = 1,2,       n, Ij(Jh . Ij-Jj+r —L) = P, whence 7, is invertible. Conversely, if
                                .       .
                                            ,
                                                                          -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXAMPLE. If F is a field, then the principal ideals (xi) and (x 2 ) in the poly-
each Ij is invertible, then (7r    In ) (Ir   In' ) = P, whence 7r    In is invertible.                                            1
                                                                                                                                       •   •   -
                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                            nomial domain F[x u x 2 are prime but not maximal (since (xi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ]           (xi,x 2 )   F[x u x 2 ]).                                       C                     C
    (ii) The proof is by induction on m with the case m =    being left to the reader.                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Consequently, F[x u x 2 ] is not Dedekind (Theorem 6.5). Since F[x u x 2 ] is Noetherian
If w > 1, choose one of the Pi, say Pi, such that Pi does not properly contain P for                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    by Theorem 4.9, the class of Dedekind domains is properly contained in the class of
/ = 2,       m. Since Qi-
                .   .       .
                             Q n = Pr Pm CI Pi and Pi is prime some (?,, say Q u is
                                    ,
                                                                                                                              •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Noetherian domains.
contained in P (Definition IIL2.14). Similarly since Pr }
                                                               Pm = Qv Qn CI (?i,                                                                                                                •                         •   •




P C Qi for some Hence Pi C & C Pi. By the minimality of Pi we must have
    t
                                                                /'.




Pi = Qi = Pi. Since Pi = Q is invertible, Remark (ii) after Theorem 6.3 implies                    x                                                                                                                                                                Lemma 6.6. 7/1 is a fractional ideal ofan integral domain R with quotient field K and
                                                                                               PiPy                           Pm = QiQr                     •
                                                                                                                                                                    Qn.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f £ 77ow R (I,R), then for all a,b e I:                             af(b) = bf(a).

Therefore by the induction hypothesis m = n and (after reindexing) P» = Qi for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROOF. Now a = r/s and b = v/t (r,s,v,t e P; s,t ^ 0) so sa = r and tb = v.
/       = 1,2,          .       .       .   ,   m.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hence sab = rb e 7 and    /a6 = vazl. Thus sf(tab) = f(stab) = tf(sab) in R.

   The example preceding Lemma 6.4 and Theorem III. 3.4 show that every nonzero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Therefore, a/(6) = sa/(Z>)A =         =         = ^/(fl)// = bf(a)./WA
prime ideal in a principal ideal domain is both invertible and maximal. More generally
we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lemma 6.7.                                   invertible fractional ideal of an integral domain                                                 R with quotient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    field   K z5 a finitely generated R-module.
Theorem 6.5. 7/R is a Dedekind domain, then every nonzero prime ideal ofR is in-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
vertible and maximal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PROOF. Since I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I = P, there exist a { e I~\bi e 7 such that 1*                                           =   £ A-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i       =l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a    t   If


    PROOF. We show first that every invertible prime ideal P is maximal. If                                                                                                                                                                                         c e 7, then c           = 2^ (ca )b Furthermore each ca^ £ P since a e 7_1 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l        i.                                                             l                {   a £ AT a7    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CP      }




a s R - P, we must show that the ideal P + Ra generated by P and a is R. If                                                                                                                                                                                         Therefore 7 is generated as an P-module by b u                                                   .   .    .       (Theorem IV.1.5(iii)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,


P + Ra 9^ R, then since R is Dedekind, there exist prime ideals P and Qj such that                                                                                                                            t



P + Ra = PiP     Pm and P + Ra = Q Q r         Q n Let tt R -> P/P be the canoni-
                                                    2
                                                        -   •
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                   x                            .                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We have seen that every nonzero ideal 7 in a principal ideal domain D is in-
cal epimorphism and consider the principal ideaLsin R/P generated respectively by                                                                                                                                                                                           Furthermore 7 is isomorphic to D as a 7)-module (see Theorem IV. 1.5(f)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vertible.
ir(a) and ir(a 2 ).                                  Clearly                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thus 7 is a free and hence projective 7)-module. This result also holds in arbitrary
                                                (7T(fl))          - 7T(Pi)-                        •
                                                                                                               7T(Pm )            and                      2
                                                                                                                                                   (7T(tf ))        = 7T(Qi).                        •   .7T(0 B ).                                                 integral domains.
404                                           CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                   6.         DEDEKIND DOMAINS                                                                               405


Theorem 6.8. Let R be an integral domain and I a fractional ideal ofR. Then I is in-                                                                                                                            (iv)    f| P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n       = 0;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ntN*
vertible if and only ifl is a projective R-module.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (v)    P is principal.
             PROOF. (=>) By Lemma 6.7 and Theorem IV.1.5, / = Rbi                                                                                                        -\        \-   Rbn with      Assuming (i)-(v) for now, let / be any proper ideal of R. Then / is contained in a non-

               and l R = 23
                                                   n
                                                                                       Let F be a free 7?-module with a basis of n elements
                                                                                                                                                                                                      zero maximal ideal                               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of R (Theorem III.2.18), which is necessarily prime (Theorem
bi-e I
                                         i=l
                                                 ( a< £
                                                                                                                                                                                                      III.2.19). By uniqueness                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   = P, whence I CZ P. Since p| Pn = by (iv), there is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      neN*
ex   ,       ...    ,   en        .   Then the map it                    :   F — / defined by ^ |—
                                                                                       >                                                       is       an P-module epimorphism
                                                                                                                                                                                                      largest integer                         m such that I CZ P m and / $zf P™ +1 Choose be I — P m+1                                                                             Since
                                                                                                                                                                    Ker t — F ^ I — 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                        .



(see Theorem IV.2.1), and there is a short exact sequence:                                                                                                                     >                  >
                                                                                                                                                                                                      P = (a) for some a e R by (v), P m = (a) m = (a m ). Since beP m b = ua m Further-                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,


Define f                      :   /   —* F by f (c) = caie H                     x                      h ca n <? n (c e /) and verify that f is an P-module                                          more, u$P = (a) (otherwise beP m+l = (a m+1 )). Consequently, u is a unit in R;
homomorphism such that 7rf = 1 /; (note that cai e R for each since ai e /_1 ). Con-                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (otherwise (u) would be a proper ideal by Theorem III. 3. 2 and hence contained in P
sequently the exact sequence splits and / is a direct summand of a free P-module                                                                                                                      by the argument used above). Therefore by Theorem III. 3. 2 P m = (a m ) = (ua m )
(Theorem IV. 1.1 8). Therefore, / is projective by Theorem IV. 3. 4.                                                                                                                                  = (b) CZ /, whence / is the principal ideal P m = (a m).
             (<=) Let                     X = [bj \j eJ] be a (possibly infinite) set of nonzero generators of the                                                                                             Statements (i)-(v) are justified as follows,
projective P-module /. Let b be a fixed element of X. Let F be a free P-module with                                                                                                                        (i) Clearly R CZ I. It is easy to see that 7 is a subring of K and a fractional ideal

basis           {   <?j   •
                              |
                                  j e J\          and let <p     :   F — / be the P-module epimorphism defined by e H bi
                                                                                   >                                                                                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                      of R, whence I is isomorphic (as an ^-module) to an ideal of R (Remark preceding
(Theorem                              IV.2.1).             Since /            is       projective there                              is       an P-module homomorphism                                Theorem 6.3). Thus since R is Noetherian, I is finitely generated (Theorem 1.9).
\p       :   I —*       F such that 4>yp = 1                             /.      For each j eJ let 7r                                3
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                          :   F — Pe ^ R be the canonical
                                                                                                                                                    >        y                                        Theorem 5.3 (with T = 7) implies that every element of 7 is integral over R. There-
projection that maps 23 r                                        *'^»"       £   F onto r £ ^ ( see Theorem IV.2.1). Then for each j the
                                                                                                        ?                                                                                             fore, I CZ R since R is integrally closed. Hence 7 = R.
                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (ii) Recall that R CZ J' for every ideal J in R. Let ^ be the set of all ideals J in R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

map 6j = irjyp / — P is an P-module homomorphism. Let c, = dj(bo). For any
                                              :        >

                                                                                                                                                                                                      such that R CZ J      Since P is a proper ideal (Definition III. 2. 14), every nonzero ele-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1

c e /, ccj = cdjibo) = bodj(c) by Lemma 6.6, whence in the quotient field K of P,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




c(ci/bo) = cc -/£ = b dj(c)/b =     (c) £ P. Therefore
                                          3                                                7                                                                                                          ment of P is a nonunit by Theorem III. 3.2. If J = (a), (0 ^ a e P), then l R /aeJ-\
                                                                     Cj/boel-                  1
                                                                                                       = {as A:| a/ C /?}.                                                                            but \ R /a \ R, whence RC J~ l Therefore, is nonempty. Since R is Noetherian, £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .




Consequently, for any c £ /
                                                                                                                                                                                                      contains a maximal element  M (Theorem    We claim Mis a prime ideal of R. If                   1.4).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ab £      M with a,b R and a M, choose   eM~ — R. Then c(ab) e R, whence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \                                    c e         l


                                                                                 =      Z
                                                                                        jeJi
                                                                                                                       =     Z
                                                                                                                             jeJi
                                                                                                                                     ciCi/bo)e h                                                      bc(aR + M) CZ R and be e (aR + M)~K Therefore, be e R (otherwise, aR + M e 3,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      contradicting the maximality of M). Consequently, c{bR                                                                                 + M) CZ R, and thus
where Ji is the finite subset [j eJ                                                        \       7
                                                                                                       (c) 5* 0}             .   Therefore, for any nonzero eel,                                      c £ (bR -f M)~ l                    .        M implies that bR + M = M,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Since c $ R the maximality of
                                                                                                                                                                                                      whence 6 M. Therefore M     prime by Theorem         Since M ^   we must                                                III.2.15.
                                  C   = 4»Kc) = 0(Z ciCj/bdei) =
                                                                 jeJi
                                                                                                                      Z
                                                                                                                      jeJ\
                                                                                                                                 c(c,/Z> )Z> 7          =
                                                                                                                                                                 jzJi
                                                                                                                                                                        (Ci/bdbj),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         £

                                                                                                                                                                                                      have P = M by uniqueness. Thus   CM =P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0,



whence                        U = ]T {cjb^b, with                                      c,/Z>           £ 7"
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                  .    It follows that                      R C 7^7. Since 7" / C P       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (iii) Clearly P CZ PP CZ R. The argument in the first paragraph of the proof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1



                                                                                                                                                                                                      shows that P is the unique maximal ideal in R, whence P = PP~ l or PP~ l = R.
is       always true, R = 7_1 7. Therefore / is invertible.                                                                                                                                           But if P = PP~\ then                                  ^C?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and by (i) and (ii), P (Z P -1 CZ P = R, which is a

             The characterization of Dedekind domains to be given below requires us to intro-                                                                                                         contradiction. Therefore PP-1 =                                                 R and P is invertible.
duce another concept. A discrete valuation ring is a principal ideal domain that has                                                                                                                           (iv) If        fl                           0,       then          f|            P"   is       a       fractional        ideal            of R. Verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          neiV *                                                  neN*
exactly one nonzero prime ideal; (the zero ideal is prime in any integral domain).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      P"   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               C fl          7> n .       Then by (i) and (ii) R CZ P"                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c f| P» = P, which                         is   a contra-

                                                                                                                                                                                                      diction.
Lemma 6.9. 7/R is a Noetherian, integrally closed integral domain and R has a                                                                                                                                  (v)     There exists aeP such that a^P 2                                                   ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (otherwise              P = P     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,       whence p|         Pn =
unique nonzero prime ideal P, then R is a discrete valuation ring.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     neN*
                                                                                                                                                                                                      P r±                      Then aP" is a nonzero ideal in P such that aP~ <?L P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     contradicting (iv)).                                                   1                                                                                  l



             PROOF. We need only show that every proper ideal in R is principal. This re-                                                                                                             (otherwise, a e aR  = aP~ P CZ P ). The first paragraph of the proof shows that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l                 2



quires the following facts, which are proved below:                                                                                                                                                   every proper ideal in R is contained in P, whence aP~ = R. Therefore by                                                                l


                                                                                                                                                                                                      (iii), (a) = (a)R = (a)P^P = (aP-^P = RP = P.
              (i)         Let K be the quotient field of R. For every fractional ideal I of R the set
I = [a £                   K ai CZ 1} is precisely P;
                                      I




              (ii)        RCZP-i;                                                                                                                                                                     Theorem 6.10. 777^ following conditions on an integral domain R are equivalent.
             (iii)        P is invertible;                                                                                                                                                                       (i)    R /j a Dedekind domain;
406                                CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                    6.       DEDEKIND DOMAINS                                                                                                   407



        (ii)       every proper ideal in R is uniquely a product                           of a finite number of prime                                       /   C Mj C R (Theorem III.2.18; Axiom of Choice). If / = R, let MR = R. Then
ideals;
                                                                                                                                                            IMr is a fractional ideal of R with IMr CZ M/M/ -1 CZ R. Therefore, IMr is an
                                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                                     1                                                                     1

       (iii)       every nonzero ideal in R is invertible;
                                                                                                                                                            ideal of R that clearly contains   Also, if / is proper, then / (Z IMr (otherwise             /.                                                                                           1


       (iv)        every fractional ideal ofR is invertible;
        (v) the set of all fractional ideals                      ofR is a group under multiplication;                                                                                   R = RR = (/- /)(M/ - M/ ) = /"^/MrOMj = MM/
                                                                                                                                                            since / and M/ are invertible,                                                                                                                1         1



       (vi)        every ideal in R is projective;                                                                                                           = RMj =    M7 which contradicts the choice of Mi). Let 5 be the set of all ideals of R
                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



      (vii)        every fractional ideal ofR is projective;                                                                                                and define a function / S — S by / 1— IMr Given a proper ideal there exists by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :                           *                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .




      (viii)       R is Noetherian, integrally closed and every nonzero prime ideal is maximal;                                                             the Recursion Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction (with fn = /for all n) a function
       (ix)        R is Noetherian and for every nonzero prime ideal Po/R, the localization                                                                 4>    :   N — S such that 0(0) = / and <p(n + 1) = /(</>(«)). If we denote
                                                                                                                                                                            >                                                                                                                                                                              by/n and
Rp ofR at P is a discrete valuation ring.                                                                                                                   M by M then we have an ascending ~chain of
                                                                                                                                                                  Jn                  n,                                                                                                                             ideals   / = J       C Ji C J C            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •   •   •




                                                                                                                                                            such that / = / and/n+ i = f(Jn ) = JnMn                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .    Since R is Noetherian and J is proper,
                                                                                                                                                            there is a least integer k such that
     PROOF. The equivalence (iv) <=> (v) is trivial (see Theorem 6.3). (i) => (ii) and
(ii) => (iii) follow from Lemma 6.4 and Theorem 6.5. (iii)   (vi) and (vii) <=> (iv) are
                                                                                                                                                                                                            «/       = Jo CZ                                   CZ             •   •   •   CZ                  CZ J/c = Jk+i.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^                9±                      9±                  t±

immediate consequences of Theorem 6.8. (vi)                     follows from the Remark
                                                                                (vii)
                                                                                                                                                            Thus Jk = .4+1 = /(/*) = JkMr The remarks above show that this can occur only             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .


preceding Theorem 6.3. In order to complete the proof we need only prove the
                                                                                                                                                            if Jk = R. Consequently, R = Jk = f(Jk~i) = Jk~\Mf_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                v whence
implications (iv)      (viii), (viii) => (ix) and (ix) => (i).

    (iv) => (viii) Every ideal of R is invertible by (iv) and hence finitely generated by                                                                                                          Jk -i = Jk-iR = Jk-iMk~\                                                                   M       k -i    = RMk-i =       M k -i.

Lemma 6.7. Therefore R is Noetherian by Theorem 1.9. Let K be the quotient field                                                                                            M          = Jk-i CZJk = R,                                           M
                                                                                                                                                            Since               k -\                                                                      k -i            is          a maximal ideal.                    The minimality of k in-
of R. If u z K is integral over R, then R[u] is a finitely generated 7?-submodule of K
by Theorem 5.3. Consequently, the second example after Definition 6.2 shows that                                                                            sures that each of                          M    ,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M_  A       2           is          also            maximal (otherwise Mj = R, whence
R[u] is a fractional ideal of R. Therefore, R[u] is invertible by (iv). Thus since                                                                          Ji+i       = JjMj" = JjR' = JjR = Jj). It is easy to verify that
                                                                                                                                                                                           1            1



R[u]R[u] = R[u],R[u] = RR[u] = (^[w]-^[w])/?[w] =                                  RM^RM
                                                                        = R, whence u z R.
                                                                                                                                                                            M              =          - /*_ M^ = Jk _ M£ M£ 2 =                                                                                . = JMo-'Mr            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M^
                                                                                                                                                                                      _x
Therefore R is integrally closed. Finally if P is a nonzero prime ideal in R, then there
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                 fc                                      2                       2                        z               z                                                                2.


is a maximal ideal                             M
                         of R that contains P (Theorem III.2.18). Mis invertible by (iv).                                                                   Consequently, since each                                     M               t       is invertible,

Consequently M~ P is a fractional ideal of R with M~ l P
                                               l                        _1
                                                                              = R, whence                  CM M
M~ l P is an ideal in R. Since M{M~ lP) = RP = P and P is prime; either                                                                    MCPor                                               M,_!(M            -   •       -M*_ 2 ) = /Mo"                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -M^Mo-        -M*_ 2 ) =
M~ l P CZ P. But if M~ l P P, then R                C-1
                                                                  CM
                                                        = M~ l R = M~ PP~       PP' 1     R,                   l           l
                                                                                                                                       C           C        Thus J is the product maximal (hence prime) ideals. Therefore R is Dedekind.
whence        M
             _1
                 = R. Thus R    =         1
                                            =       =   MM'       MR
                                                       M, which contradicts the fact that                                                              M
is maximal. Therefore              P and hence     MC                  M
                                                     = P. Therefore, P is maximal.                                                                                    We close with an example showing that the class of principal ideal domains is
    (viii) ==> (ix) Rp is an integrally closed integral domain by Theorem 5.8. By
                                                                                                                                                            properly contained in the class of Dedekind domains.
Lemma III.4.9 every ideal in Rp is of the form Ip = i/s i z I;s £ P] where / is an {               \                               ,



ideal of R. Since every ideal of R is finitely generated by (viii) and Theorem 1.9, it
                                                                                                                                                                      EXAMPLE. The integral domain Z[-\flb] = {a + 6^10 \a,bzZ] has quotient
follows that every ideal of Rp is finitely generated. Therefore, Rp is Noetherian by
                                                                                                                                                            field Q(Vl0)= [r s^JlO r,s z Q} A tedious calculation and elementary number
                                                                                                                                                                                                    +                                                                 .


Theorem 1 .9. By Theorem III .4.1 1 every nonzero prime ideal of Rp is of the form Ip,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \




                                                                                                                                                            theory showjhat Z[\/l0] is integral ly^losed (Exercise 14). Since the evaluation map
where / is a nonzero prime ideal of R that is contained in P. Since every nonzero                                                                           Z[x]  Z[^10] given_by f(x)\-^ f(^\0) is an epimorphism and Z[x] is Noetherian
prime ideal of R is maximal by (viii), Pp must be the unique nonzero prime ideal in
                                                                                                                                                            (Theorem 4.9), Z[^10] is also Noetherian (Exercise 1.5). Finally it is not difficult to
Rp. Therefore, Rp is a discrete valuation ring by Lemma 6.9.
                                                                                                                                                            provejhat every nonzero prime ideal of Z[^|^0] is maximal (Exercise 15). Therefore
      (ix) => (i)              We first show that every ideal / (^0) is invertible. II' is a fractional                        1

                                                                                                                                                            Z[\/l0]         is        a Dedekind                 domain by Theorem 6.10(viii). However Zl^TO] is not a
ideal of R contained in R (Remark (i) after Theorem 6.3), whence II' 1 is an ideal in R.
                                                                                                                                                            principal ideal domain (Theorem III. 3. 7 and Exercise III.3.4).
If II' 1 ?± R,             then there is a maximal ideal                   M containing II' (Theorem       1
                                                                                                                                               III.2.18).

Since     M  prime (Theorem III. 2. 19), the ideal IM in R M is principal by (ix); say
                   is

Im = (a/s) with a z I and s z R — M. Since R is Noetherian, / is finitely generated,                                                                                                             EXERCISES
say / = (b u         b n ), by Theorem 1.9. For each /, b /\ R z I M whence in R M
                           .       .   .
                                           ,                                                   x                       ,                                ,




bi/\ R = (ri/Si)(a/s) for some nzR, s zR — M. Therefore s sb = r azl. Let
                                                                   l                                               l       i               l
                                                                                                                                                             1.       The ideal generated by 3 and + ^/5/ in the subdomain Z[\/5/] of C                           1                                                                                                 is   in-

/   = ssis   2 -        -s n   .   Since R — Mis multiplicative, t z R — M. In the quotient field of R                                                                vertible.

we have for every /, (t/a)bi = tb la = s±- s^s^- sn r z R, whence t/ael' 1
                                                              t
                                                                       •               •   •
                                                                                                       {
                                                                                                                                                        .

                                                                                                                                                             2.       An invertible ideal in an integral domain that is a local ring is principal.
Consequently / = (t/a)a z 7 -1 / CZ M, which contradicts the fact that t z R — M.
Therefore     = R and / is invertible.                                                                                                                       3.       If / is an invertible ideal in an integral domain                                                                                            R and 5 is a multiplicative set in
   For each ideal I(^R) of R choose a maximal ideal             7 of R such that                            M                                                         R with 0$S, then S' ! is invertible in S^R.    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .




408                    CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                       7.     THE HUBERT NULLSTELLENSATZ                                                                                                                                  409


 4.   Let R be any ring with identity and P an /^-module. Then P is projective if and                       16.         A valuation domain is an integral domain P such that for all a,b e P either a b or                                                                                                                                             \




      only if there exist sets {a* / e /}|
                                                     CP
                                             and /:\ i e /}                 C
                                                              Hom^P,/?) such that
                                                              {
                                                                                                                        b a. (Clearly a discrete valuation ring is a valuation domain.) A Priifer domain is
                                                                                                                                    |




      for all a e P, a =       23 f(a)ai- [See the proof of Theorem 6.8.]                                               an integral domain in which every finitely generated ideal is invertible.
                               hi
                                                                                                                                        (a)         The following are equivalent: (i) P is a Priifer domain; (ii) for every prime
 5.   (Converse of Lemma 6.9) A discrete valuation ring R is Noetherian and in-                                         ideal P in P, R P is a valuation domain; (iii) for every maximal ideal                                                                                                                                             Min P, R M
      tegrally closed. [Hint: Exercise 5.8.]                                                                            is a                    valuation domain.
                                                                                                                                        (b)         A Priifer domain is Dedekind if and only if it is Noetherian.
 6.   (a) If every prime ideal in an integral domain              R is invertible, then R is Dedekind.                                  (c)         If    P is a Priifer domain with quotient field K, then any domain S such that
      (b) If R is a Noetherian integral domain in which every maximal ideal is in-                                      P C S C K is Prufer.
      vertible, then R is Dedekind.

 7.   If 5 is a multiplicative subset of a Dedekind domain                R (with 1^ sS,0 ^S), then
      S~ R is a Dedekind domain.
            l

                                                                                                           7.      THE HUBERT NULLSTELLENSATZ
 8.   If R is an integral domain and             P a prime ideal in R[x] such that .P fl P = 0,
                                                                                                                   The results of Section VI. 1 and Section 5 are used to prove a famous result of
      then P[x]p is a discrete valuation ring.
                                                                                                           classical algebraic geometry, the Nullstellensatz (Zeros Theorem) of Hilbert. Along

 9.   If a Dedekind domain P has only a finite number of nonzero prime ideals                              the way we also prove the Noether Normalization Lemma.                                                                                                                                        We begin with a very
                      R is a principal ideal domain. [Hint: There exists cii e P — P 2
      Pi, ... , P„, then                                                                       t       t
                                                                                                           brief sketch of the geometric background (this discussion is continued at the end of

      and by the Chinese Remainder Theorem III. 2. 25 there exists he Pi such that                         the section).
      bi = a (mod Pi) and £» = 1 * (mod P ) for y ^ /. Show that Pi = (b ), which im-
                   -
                   t                                  3                                 t
                                                                                                                   Classical algebraic geometry is the study of simultaneous solutions of systems of
      plies that every ideal is principal.]                                                                polynomial equations:

10. If / is a nonzero ideal in a             Dedekind domain P, then R/l is an Artinian ring.                                                                                                 /(x!,x 2 ...,*„) =           ,                                                         (feS)

11.   Every proper ideal in a Dedekind domain may be generated by at most two                              where AT is a field and S                                                          C K[x u ...,*„]. A solution of this system                                                                                              is   an Az-tuple,
      elements.                                                                                            (tfi,    .   .       .           ,a n )eFn = F X F X                                    •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       X F (n factors), where F is an algebraically closed ex-
                                                                                                           tension field of and f(a u        an ) =               K
                                                                                                                                                       for all feS. Such a solution is called a zero
                                                                                                                                                                                               .       -       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


12.   An P-module A is divisible if rA = A for all nonzero r e P. If P is a Dedekind                                n
                                                                                                           of S in F The set of all zeros of S is called the affine K-variety (or algebraic set) in F n
                                                                                                                                                .


      domain, every divisible P-module is injective. [N.B. the converse is also true,                      defined by S and is denoted V(S). Thus
      but harder.]
                                                                                                                                                    V(S) = \(a u ...                                   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                               a n )EF»\ f(a u                                     .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,   a r,) =       for all /eS|.
13. (Nontrivial) If    P is a Dedekind domain with quotient field K, F is a finite di-                     Note that if / is the ideal of K[x u        x n generated by 5, then V(I) = V(S).                                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ]
      mensional extension field of K and 5 is the integral closure of P in F (that is, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



                                                                                                               The assignment 5 I— V(S) defines a function from the set of all subsets of >

      ring of all elements of F that are integral over P), then 5 is a Dedekind domain.
                                                                                                           K[x u       x n to the set of all subsets of Fn Conversely, define a function from the
                                                                                                                            •           .   •   ,        ]                                                                                                     .




14. (a)         Prove that the integral domain Z[\/l0] is an integral extension ring of Z with
                                                                                                           set of subsets of Fn to the set of subsets of K[x u ...,*„] by Y\->J(Y), where Y    Fn                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                           and
      quotient field Q(VlO).
      (b) Let u s Q(\/lO) be integral over Zl^lO]. Then u is integral over               Z (Theorem                     J(Y)= ifeK[x u ...,x„]\f(a u                                                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an ) =                  for all       (a u        .        .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   a n ) e Y\
      5.6).Furthermore if u e Q, then u e Z (Exercise 5.8). Prove that if u e Q(\/l0)                      Note that J(Y) is actually an ideal of K[x u ...,*„]. The correspondence given by V
      and w 4 Q' tnen " i s tne root °f an irreducible monic polynomial of degree 2 in                     and J has the same formal properties as does the Galois correspondence (priming
      Z[x]. [Hint: Corollary III.6.13_and Theorem V.I.6.]
                                                                                                           operations) between intermediate fields of an extension and subgroups of the Galois
      (c)       Prove that if u = r   + s^lO    e Q(\/T5)   and u is a root of x 2 + ax + b e Z[x],        group. In other words we have the following analogue of Lemma V.2.6.
      then a =         -2r and b = r 2 - 10s 2 [Hint: note that m 2 - 2ru + (r2 - 10s 2) = 0;
                                                 .




      if u ^     Q use Theorem V.I.6.]
      (d)       Prove that Z[^\0] is integrally closed. [Hint: if u   r + W 10 £ Q(V^) is a                Lemma 7.1. Let F be an algebraically closed extension field of YL and let S, T be sub-
      root of x 2      + ax: + b e Z[x] and a is even, then r s Z by (c); follows that s Z.
                                                                                it                 e       sets o/K[xi,                              .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                     ,   x,J         andX,Y subsets ofF n Then                                                 .



      The assumption that a is odd leads to a contradiction.]
                                                                                                                        (i)                 V(K[x„                   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                     x n ])   = 0; J(F») = 0; J(0) = K[x u                                                                       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x ];fl



15. (a)            nonzero prime ideal of the ring Z[Vl0], then P fl Z is a nonzero
                If P is a                                                                                           (ii)                    SCT=^ V(T) <Z V(S) andX(ZY=^ J(Y) C J(X);
      prime ideal of Z. [Hint: if ^ w e P, then u is a root of x 2  ax           +
                                                                         b e Z[x] by   +                           (iii)                    S <Z J(V(S)) and Y CI V(J(Y));
      Exercise 14. Show that one of a,b is nonzero and lies in P.]                                                 ( iv )                   V(S) = V(J(V(S))) andJ(Y) = J(V(J(Y))).
      (b) Every nonzero prime ideal of Z[yf\G] is maximal. [Use (a), Theorem III. 3.4
      and either an easy direct argument or Theorem 5.12.]                                                         PROOF. Exercise.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z




410                                                                       CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.                       THE HUBERT NULLSTELLENSATZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                            411


      It is                           natural to ask which objects are closed under this correspondence, that is,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is       integral over                                                  K[v 2i                          .           .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vn ]            (whence                                    F is algebraic over K(v                                                                                                       2,       .       .       .         i?   n )).    If
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,


which S and Y satisfy J(V(S)) = S and V(J(Y)) = Y. Closed subsets of F" are easily                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \v 2 ,        .       .       .       ,v n        \           is   algebraically independent, then r = n                                                                                                                                                  — 1 by Corollary VI. 1.6 and
described (Exercise 1), but the characterization of closed subsets of K[x x    x n ] re-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,                                       the theorem is proved. If not, the preceding argument with K[v 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,    .    .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v n ] in place of
quires the Nullstellensatz, which states that J(V(I)) = Rad / for every proper ideal /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R shows that for some w         wn e R, K[v         t?„] is integral over K[w 3  wn                                 3,       .    .   .   ,                                                      2,       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                                     ,   .    .     .        ].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,


of K[x u       An]. In order to prove the Nullstellensatz we need two preliminary
                                          .       .       •
                                                                  ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   By Theorem 5.6 R is integral over K[w               wn (whence F is algebraic over                                                                                                        3,          .    .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                   ]


results, the first of which is of interest in its                                                                                                                                                                       own right.                                                                                                                                                                    K(w3       ,w„) and r < n - 2). If {vv 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,       .       .   .     wn ] is algebraically independent, we are                                                                             ,    .     .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      finished. If not, the preceding process may be repeated and an inductive argument
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      will yield an algebraically independent subset {                                                                                                                                                                           n _ r+1 , . .                       .   ,   zn            }       of r elements of R such
Theorem 7.2. (Noether Normalization Lemma) Let R be an integral domain which is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       that R is integral over K[z n _ r +u                                                                                                           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         z„].

a finitely generated extension ring of a field        K and let r be the transcendence degree
over              K of the quotient field Fo/R. Then there exists an algebraically independent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Now let AT be a field and F an algebraically closed extension field of K. If a proper
subset {ti,t 2                                            ,       .       .   .    ,    tr!             ofR such that R is integral over K[ti,                                                                                                                                      .   .       .   ,       tj.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ideal / of K[x u ...,*„]                                                                                             is finitely                               generated, say / = (g u                                                                                           .       .       .       ,       gk ), then the affine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      variety V(I) clearly consists of every (a u                                                                                                                                                                                 a n ) £ Fn that is a common root of
      PROOF. Let R = K[u u                                                                                                         .       .        .           u n ]; then                                             F = K(u u                                u n ). If [u u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  un  is                                          .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                            ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      gu                                     gk (see Exercise 4). If n                                                                               = 1,                                               is           a principal ideal domain and it is ob-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         transcendence base of F over K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •   •        •       ,

algebraically independent over K,                                                                                                                                   {
                                                                                                                                                                            uu          .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        un          \       is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vious that V(I) is nonempty. More generally (and somewhat surprisingly) we have:
by Corollary VI. 1.6, whence r = n and the theorem is trivially true. If u u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .        .       .       ,       un    |




               dependent over K, then r < n — 1 (Corollary VI. 1.7) and
is algebraically


                                                                                                                                                                    k ix ... in u^u^-                                                               -u,r            = 0,
                                                                                                                 (tl                       in)zl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lemma 7.3. 7/F is an algebraically closed extension field of a field K and I is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      proper ideal ofK[x u                                                             .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x n ], then the affine variety V(I) defined by I in F n is nonempty.
where / is a finite set of distinct Ai-tuples of nonnegative integers and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ... ln                  is a                             non-
zero element of K for every (/i, /„) £ /. Let c be a positive integer that is greater                                                           .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                        ,



than every component i s of every element (/'i,          /„) of /. If (/i,        /'„),                                                                                                                                                                    .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .        .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PROOF. By Theorems III. 2. 18 and III. 2. 19 / is contained in a proper prime
( A,     y n ) s / are such that
          .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ideal P, whence V(P) CI V(I). Consequently, it suffices to prove that V(P) is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               non-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      empty for every proper prime ideal P of K[x u  x n ]. Observe that P fl K = 0;                                                                                                                                             .       .   .


                                                          h           + c7 + c          2
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                 /3    H                                h c"- /,,
                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    = h + c/2 + cVa H                                                                                       h ^ ""!/«,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (otherwise   5* azP C\ K, whence \ K = a~ azP, contradicting the fact that P                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,




                                                      —                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             >                    and c > j\ >                                                                 is    proper).
then c                                /i                          y'i         which is impossible unless /i = y'i (since c >                                                                                                                                                                z'i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Let R be the integral domain K[x u
                              |




imply c > \h -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n_2 /            = y + c/ H                                                                                     71-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                              x n ]/P (see Theorem III. 2. 16) and let
                                                                                                    Consequently, i 2                                                           + c/ H                      3                                       h c                 n                   2                        3                                    h c                              /',,.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              — R be the canonical epimorphism. If we denote 7r(;c ) £ i? by w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K[x u                                                xn
As before c i 2 — y 2 whence / 2 = y 2 Repetition of this argument shows
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7r                                                                           >
                                                                                                        ,                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   that                     :                                .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,            ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t                                   t,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R = tt(K)[u u                                                                                                                                                                                                   K fl P = 0,
                                                                      \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      then                                                                                                     u n ].                        Furthermore since                                                                                                                                                              maps                                        isomor-
       /n) = O'i,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   .       .                                                                                                                                                                                                               7r
                     ,y'n). Therefore, the set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
0u    •       •       •
                              ,
                                                                                        •       •   •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      phically onto ir(K); in particular,                                                                                                                        tt(A:) is                              a field.                                     By the Noether Normalization
                                                                                            {   h           + c/ + c% +2
                                                                                                                                                                            •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                + c"- ^                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (/i,       ...,/„) e /                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lemma there exists a subset {t u                                                                                                               .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tr )       of R such that                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tr )           is algebraically

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      independent over tt(K) and                                                                                                             is integral over                                                    S = ir{K)[t u                                                 .           .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t r ].            If    M               is the ideal
consists of |/| distinct nonnegative integers; in particular, it has a unique maximum                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 of S generated by t u                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tr ,         then the map ir(K) —> 5/M given by 7r(a) |-» 7r(a)                                                                                                                                                                                    +M
element j\                                            + cj                    2
                                                                                   -\
                                                                                                             h c
                                                                                                                       n_1
                                                                                                                               /n              for some (j u                                                            .       .       .       ,y'n) £ /.              Let                                                                                                                           is    an isomorphism (see Theorem VI. 1.2). Consequently Mis a maximal ideal of S by
                                                                                   V2           — U —       2                                  i? 3             = «3 — Wi \                                         c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .      .       .   ,   Vn      = "n ~ ^f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Theorem III.2.20. Therefore, there is a maximal ideal N of R such that N fl S =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Theorems 5.9 and 5.12). Let r     R -> rt/W be the canonical epimorphism. Then                                                                    :



If we expand the algebraic dependence relation above, after making the substitutions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t(R) = R/N is a field by Theorem III. 2.20. The Second Isomorphism Theorem
Ui   = Vi -f uf' (2 < / < /i), we obtain                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      III.2.12 together with the maps defined above now yields an isomorphism

                                                                                                                                                     + "-- +cn " 1, B                           '




                                                                                  A:y 1 ...y n              « 1 » 4c » +c2 »                                              + /(«1,02,03, ...,«?») = 0,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K ^ tt(K) ^ S/M = S/(N fl S) ^ (S + W/A^ = r(5),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n_1
where the degree of /e                                                                                                                                          *„] in xi is strictly less thany'i + cj H                                                                                                            2                                    h c                              /   r) .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         + M|-> 7r(a) + N = T(w(a)). Let r(7?) be an
                                                                                                                               .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      which                          is          given by a |-> tt(o) \-+ tt(o)
Therefore, u                                                   x      is          a root of the monic polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      algebraic closure of r(/?) Since 7? is integral over 5, r(7?) is an algebraic field exten-                   .




                                                              X h + cn+...+cn-l jn _|_ k]l.. jn f(X,V2,                                                                                                                     •               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,   In) £ Afe,                                                                                                                                        sion of r(5), whence r(7?) is also an algebraic closure of t(S) (Theorem V.3.4). Now F

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    By Theorem 5.5 K[u u v 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      contains an algebraic closure                                                                                                          K of K (Exercise V.3.7). By Theorem V.3.8 the isomor-
Consequently,                                                                 Wi is integral                   over #[i? 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i;„]


= K[u                                                                                               is integral over K[v 2
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,       .       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •               »«] Since each u { (2 <                                                           /       < /i) is ob-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,           .        .       .       ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      phism K                                ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t(S) extends to an isomorphism   t(R). Restriction of the inverse of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      this isomorphism yields a monomorphism a t(R) —>KCZF. Let
                          2,          .       .       .       ,                                                                                                                                     ,                           ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      be the compo-                                                                                                                         :

                                                                                                                                                                    v n ], Theorems 5.5 and 5.6 imply that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <f>
viously integral over K[u u v 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R A T (R)
                                                                                                                           ,       •       •        •
                                                                                                                                                            ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sition K[x u                                       •       •    •   ,   xn   ]        F and verify that      K = l x and                                                                                                                                           <f>       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <f>      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P = 0.
                                                                                                                                                        R = K[u u ...,««]                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Consequently,                                                       for any /(^n, ...,x„)ePC Jt^,       jf n /(0UO,                                                                                                                        .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,             ],                                                      .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,       <K* n )) =
                                                                                        .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




412                                                                CHAPTER VIII COMMUTATIVE RINGS AND MODULES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7.       THE HILBERT NULLSTELLENSATZ                                                                                                                         413



<t>(f(x u    x n )) = 0, whence (tf>(*i),
                               .       .       .
                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                      .           -       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,       <P(x n )) is a                                                          zero of P in                                                                      Fn              .   Therefore,                                                                                                             K[x u            .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x n ]/J(V(l))
V(P) is nonempty.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Exercise 10). This ring is called the coordinate ring of V. Since / CZ J(V(J)) = Rad /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the ring T(V) has   no nonzero nilpotent elements. Furthermore Y(V) is a finitely
Proposition 7.4. (Hilbert Nullstellensatz) Let F be an algebraically closed extension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 generated algebra over  K (since K[x u ...,*„] and the ideal J(V(I)) are; see Section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IV.7). Conversely it can be proved that every finitely generated ^-algebra with no
              K and I a proper ideal ofK[\ u
field of a field                                     x n ]. Let V(I) = {(ai,     an) e                                                                                                                                                                -           •       •       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nonzero nilpotent elements is the coordinate ring of some affine variety. Therefore,
F n g(ai,
       |
             a n) =  for all gel}. Then    .   .       .
                                                               ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 there is a one-to-one correspondence between affine varieties and a rather special
           Rad I = J(V(I))                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       class of commutative rings. With a suitable definition of morphisms the affine
                                               = {feK[x ,...,x„]|f(ai,...,a„) = 1                                                                                                                                                                                                 for all                                             (a l5                .       .    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a„) £ V(I)j                              varieties form a category as do the commutative rings in question and this corre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 spondence is actually an "equivalence" of categories. Thus statements about affine
In other words, f(ai,                                                           .   .       .
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                            a„)                     =                        for every zero (ai,                                                                                                      .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a n ) of I in F n if and only if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 varieties are equivalent to certain statements of commutative algebra. For further
 m
f s I for some m > 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 information see W. Fulton [53] and I. G. MacDonald [55].

           REMARK. We shall use Lemma 7.3 to prove the theorem. Since the theorem im-
plies the lemma (Exercise 6), the two are actually equivalent.


           PROOF OF 7.4. If /£ Rad /, then f m s I for some m >                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Theorem 2.6). If                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EXERCISES
(a u       .   .       .       ,       a n ) is a zero of / in Fn then                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                             = f (a u                         m                                       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a r) = (f(a u     a n )) m Con-                                           .       .       .       ,                .                 Note: F is always an algebraically closed extension field of a field K; J, V, and Fn
sequently, since F is a field, /(ai,                                                                                                                         .    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                              ,           a n ) = 0. Therefore, Rad / (Z /K(/)-                                                                                                                                                                                                  are as above.
           Conversely, suppose / e JV(I). We may assume                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /V                                      since                                    £        Rad /. Consider
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.   A subset Y of Fn is closed (that is, V(J(Y)) = Y) if and only if Y is an affine
#[jci,             .       .       .
                                           ,
                                               a-„]                as a subring of the ring K[x u                                                                                                                                 .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,           ^j] of polynomials in n + 1 in-                                                                                                                              ^-variety determined by some subset S of K[x u                                                                                                   .   .   .       x„].
determinates over AT. Let L be the nonzero ideal of K[x u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               generated by /                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .       •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,



and x/'— 1,p. Clearly if (au                                                                                        -           -       •
                                                                                                                                                    ,       0u,6) is a zero of L in                                                                                                           F        n+l then (a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l5       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a n ) must be             2.   A subset 5 of K[x u                                                .   .   .   ,   xn   ]   is   closed (that is, J(V(S)) = S) if and only if S is a
a zero of / in Fn But (>>/ -                                            .                                                       lir)(fli,                         . F = - 1 F for all
                                                                                                                                                                          .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a n ,b) = bf(a u                                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      an ) -                           \                                                               radical ideal (that is, S is an ideal and 5 = Rad 5).
zeros (fli,                                .       .       .
                                                               ,
                                                                   a n ) of / in Fn                                 .       Therefore, L has no zeros in Fn+1 that is, V(L) is empty.                                                                                                                                                  ;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.   There is a one-to-one inclusion reversing correspondence between the set of
Consequently, L = K[x u                                                                                     .       .       .
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                      by Lemma 7.3, whence 1^ sL. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       affine AT-varieties in                                             Fn and the set of radical ideals of K[x u                                                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x n ). [See Exer-
                                                                                                                                                             t-i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cises   1       ,       2.]
                                                                                                                        If =                                                  gif + gtiyf- If),
                                                                                                                                                             t=i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.   Every affine ^-variety in Fn is of the form V(S) where S is a finite subset of
where                          f e I (1 <                                   /       <               /           — 1)                                        and g £ K[x u                 t                                                           .               .       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   -WL                                         Define                              an evaluation                                                K[x u       .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x n ]. [Hint: Theorems 1.9 and 4.9 and Exercise 3.]
homomorphism K[x u                                                                                           by     |-*             x n ,y] —> #(*i,                                                                                  .                   x„)                                                                                                           and >> |-» /_1 =
                                                                                                .       .       .
                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.   If Vi Z>                V Z>    2                       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       is a descending chain of                                                   varieties in              Fn then Vm = Vm+ =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •   •   •




U-//Ui,                                .       .       .           *„) (Corollary III. 5.6). Then in the field K(x u                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       xn)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       for some m. [Hint: Theorem 4.9 and Exercise 3.]
                                                               ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,




                                                                                                                    t-i
                                                                                If                  = ]C                                                              .       .           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              x n ,f- )f^x u                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x.).                                                                                            6.   Show that the Nullstellensatz implies Lemma 7.3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7.   If A,   .       .       .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ik are ideals of K[x u       *„], then V(h fl h fl   D /*) - V(h) U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •   •   •



Let wbea positive integer larger than the degree of gi in y for every / (1 < i < t — 1).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V(h) U                  •       •       •   U V(Ik ) and V(hh- ../*) = V(h) D V(h) fl      D V(Ik ).                                                                       •   •



Then for each /, fm(x u        x n )gi(x u        -1
                                             -**,/ ) lies in K[x u          *n], whence                     .       .       .       ,                                                         .           •       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •        •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,


                                                                   t-i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8.   A /^-variety V in Fn is irreducible provided that whenever V = W U W with                                                                                                                                      x       2
fm = fm\ F =                                                       £        fn(xi,                          .       .           .
                                                                                                                                            ,       *„)gi(*i,                                         •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,       ^, /"0                                                                                      .    .           .       ,       x n ) £ /. Therefore                                                each Wi a A^-variety in Fn either V = Y or V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    = 2                                   ,                                                 W                   W       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (a) Prove that K is irreducible if and only if 7(F)                                                                                                                                      a prime ideal in
/£ Rad / and hence 7F(/)                                                                                            C Rad                                        /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K[X U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,   *n].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) Let                               F = C and 5 = {x! 2 - 2x                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   Then F(5) is irreducible as a Q-variety
           The determination of closed objects as mentioned in the introduction of this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        )



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       but not as an R-variety.
section is now straightforward (Exercises 1-3).
           We close this section with an informal attempt to establish the connection be-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9.   Every nonempty /^-variety in Fn may be written uniquely as a finite union
tween geometry and algebra which characterizes the classical approach to algebraic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vi U V2 U       U Vk of affine AT-varieties in Fn such that F jzf K for / ^ y and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;


geometry. Let K be a field. Every polynomial / £ K[x u         x n determines a function                                                                                                                                                                                                      .       .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                    ]                                                                                             each      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             is irreducible (Exercise 8).

Fn — F by substitution: (a u      o») |-> /(fli,    <*»)• If F =      is an affine variety                                  .       .           .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -       •       •           »                                                                                                                                                                      10. The coordinate ring of an affine K~ variety V(l) is isomorphic to K[x l9 ,x n ]/J{y(J)).                                                                                                                 .   .   .



contained in Fn the restriction of this function to Vis called a regular function on V.
                                                                    ,



The regular functions V —> F form a ring T(K) which is isomorphic to
                                                                                                                              1.   SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS                             415



                                                                                                  The interdependence of the sections of this chapter is as follows:

                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                2




                              CHAPTER              |X

THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                       Much of the discussion here depends on the results of Section VIII. 1 (Chain con-
                                                                                             ditions).




                                                                                             1.   SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS
                                                                                                  In this section we study those rings that will be used as the basic building blocks
                                                                                             in the structure theory of rings.
                                                                                                  We begin by recalling several facts that motivate a large part of this chapter.
                                                                                                   (i)     If   V is a vector space over a division ring D, then Y\om D (V,V) is a ring (Exer-
                                                                          presented. Al-
In the first part of this chapter a general structure theory for rings is                    cise IV. 1.7), called the endomorphism ring of V.

though the concepts and techniques introduced have       widespread   application, com-           (ii)     The endomorphism ring of a finite dimensional vector space over a division
plete structure theorems are    available only  for certain classes of rings. The  basic     ring is isomorphic to the ring of all a?       X n matrices over a (possibly different) division
method for determining such a class of rings might be described intuitively as follows.      ring (Theorem VII. 1 .4).
One singles out an "undesirable" property P that satisfies certain conditions, in                 (iii)    If   D is a division ring, then Mat„D is simple (that is, has no proper ideals;
particular, that every ring has    an ideal which   is   maximal with respect to having      Exercise III. 2.9) and is both left and right Artinian (Corollary VIII. 1.12). Conse-
property P. This ideal is called the P-radical of the ring. One then attempts
                                                                                  to find    quently by (ii) every endomorphism ring of a finite dimensional vector space over a
structure theorems for the class of rings with zero P-radical. Frequently
                                                                             one must in-    division ring is both simple and Artinian.
                                                                       in order to obtain
clude additional hypotheses (such as appropriate chain conditions)                                (iv)     The endomorphism ring of an infinite dimensional vector space over a divi-
                                                    discussed in full detail in the intro-
really strong structure theorems. These   ideas are                                          sion ring is neither simple nor Artinian (Exercise 3). However, such a ring is primi-
ductions to Sections  1 and 2 below. The   reader would  do well to read  both  these dis-
                                                                                             tive, in a sense to be defined below.

cussions before beginning serious study of the chapter.
                                                                          (Section 2) and         Matrix rings and endomorphism rings of vector spaces over division rings arise
      We shall investigate two different radicals, the Jacobson radical
                                                                   theorems  are obtained    naturally in many different contexts. They are extremely useful mathematical con-
the prime radical (Section 4). Very   deep  and   useful structure
                                                                     with  zero Jacobson     cepts.       Consequently it seems reasonable to take such rings, or at least rings that
for left  Artinian  semisimple  rings (that  is, left Artinian rings
                                                                                    char-    closely resemble them, as the basis of a structure theory and to attempt to describe
radical) in Section 3. Goldie's Theorem    is discussed in Section 4. It includes a
                                                                             rings with      arbitrary rings in terms of these basic rings.
acterization of left Noetherian semiprime rings (that is, left Noetherian
                                                                 structure theorems are         With the advantage of hindsight we single out two fundamental properties of the
zero prime radical). The  basic building blocks for all of these
                                                                   certain "dense" sub-
                                                                                             endomorphism ring of a vector space V: simplicity (Definition 1.1) and primitivity
the endomorphism rings of vector spaces over division rings and
                                                                                             (Definition 1.5). As noted above these two concepts roughly correspond to the cases
rings of such rings (Section 1).
                                                                                      ring   when V is finite or infinite dimensional respectively. In this section we shall analyze
   The last two sections of the chapter deal with algebras over a commutative
                                                                     are carried over
                                                                                             simple and primitive rings and show that in several important cases they coincide
with identity. The Jacobson radical and related concepts and results
                                                                                             with endomorphism rings. In other cases they come as close to being endomorphism
to algebras (Section 5). Division algebras are studied in
                                                              Section 6.
                                                                                  be-        rings as is reasonably possible.
      theme that occurs continually in this chapter is the close interconnection
      A
                                                of modules over  the ring. The use of              More precisely, an arbitrary primitive ring R is shown to be isomorphic to a par-
tween the structure of a ring and the structure
                                                                                             ticular kind of subring (called a dense subring) of the endomorphism ring of a vector
modules in the study of rings has resulted in a host of new insights and
                                                                         deep theo-
                                                                                             space Kover a division ring D (Theorem 1.12). R is left Artinian if and only if dim D V
rems.

                                            414
416                         CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                 1.   SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS                                 417


is finite    (Theorem 1.9). In this classical case, simple and primitive rings coincide and                      distributive and that xy = yx       +
                                                                                                                                                  1 and ax = xa, ay = ya for aeF. Then R is a well-

R is actually isomorphic to the complete endomorphism ring of V (Theorem 1.14).                                  defined simple ring that has no zero divisors and is not a division ring (Exercise 1).
Furthermore in this situation &\m D Vh uniquely determined and Fis determined up
to isomorphism (Proposition 1.17). These results amply justify the designation of                                   Let A = Ra be a cyclic /^-module. The map 6 R —> A defined by r\-^ra is an
                                                                                                                                                                           :



simplicity and primitivity as fundamental concepts.                                                              /^-module epimorphism whose kernel / is a left ideal (submodule) of R (Theorem
      As noted in the introduction to this chapter modules play a crucial role in ring                          IV.1.5).  By the First Isomorphism Theorem IV.1.7 R/I is isomorphic to A. By
theory. Consequently we begin by defining and developing the elementary properties                              Theorem IV. 1.10 every submodule of R/I is of the form///, where/ is a left ideal of
of simplicity for both rings and modules.                                                                       R that contains /. Consequently R/I (and hence A) has no proper submodules if and
                                                                                                                only if / is a maximal left ideal of R. Since every simple /^-module is cyclic by Re-
                                                                                                                mark (iii) above, every simple /^-module is isomorphic to R/I for some maximal left
                                                                                                                ideal /. Conversely, if / is a maximal left ideal of R, R/I will be simple provided
Definition 1.1.      A {left) module A over a ring R is simple (or irreducible) provided
                                                                                                                R(R/I) 5* 0. A condition that guarantees that R(R/I) ^                   given by
RA ^          and A has no proper submodules. A ring R is simple ifR 2 ^ and R has no                                                                                               is

proper (two-sided) ideals.

                                                                                                                Definition 1.2.       A left ideal I in a ring R is regular (or modular) if there exists e e R
      REMARKS, (i) Every simple module [ring] is nonzero.                                                       such that r — re el for every r e R. Similarly, a right ideal J is regular // there exists
      (ii)   Every simple module over a ring with identity is unitary (Exercise IV. 1.1 7).                     e s   R such that r — er e J for every r e R.
A unitary module A over a ring R with identity has RA ^ 0, whence A is simple if
and only if A has no proper submodules.
                                                                                                                      REMARK. Every left ideal in a ring R with identity is regular (let e = 1^).
    (iii) Every simple module A is cyclic; in fact, A = Ra for every nonzero a e A.

[Proof: both Ra (a s A) and B = {c z A Rc = Q\ are submodules of A, whence
                                                      \




each is either or A by simplicity. But RA ^      implies B ^ A. Consequently B = 0,                             Theorem 1.3. A left module A over a ring R is simple ifand only ifA is isomorphic to
whence Ra = A for all nonzero as A.] However a cyclic module need not be simple                                 R/I for some regular maximal left ideal I.
(for example, the cyclic Z-module Z6 ).
    (iv) The definitions of "simple" for groups, modules, and rings can be subsumed                                 REMARKS. If R has an identity, the theorem is an immediate consequence of
into one general definition, which might be roughly stated as: an algebraic object C                            the discussion above. The theorem is true if "left" is replaced by "right" throughout.
that is nontrivial in some reasonable sense (for example, RA ^         or /? 2 ^ 0) is
simple, provided that every hornomorphism with domain C has kernel         or C. The                                  PROOF OF 1.3. The discussion preceding Definition 1.2 shows that if A is
point here is that the absence of nontrivial kernels is equivalent to the absence of                            simple, then A = Ra '^ R/I where the maximal left ideal / is the kernel of 6. Since
proper normal subgroups of a group or proper submodules of a module or proper                                   A = Ra,        a = ea for some e e R.Consequently, for any r e R, ra = rea or
ideals of a ring as the case may be.                                                                            (r — re)a = 0, whence r — re e Ker 6 = 1. Therefore / is regular.

                                                                                                                   Conversely let / be a regular maximal left ideal of R such that A ^ R/I.ln view
      EXAMPLE. Every division ring is a simple ring and a simple D-module (see the                              of the discussion preceding Definition 1.2 it suffices to prove that R(R/I)         ^ 0. If this
Remarks preceding Theorem III. 2.2).                                                                            is not the case, then for all r e   R r(e + /) = /, whence re e /. Since r — re e /, we have
                                                                                                                r e L Thus     R = I, contradicting the maximality of /.
      EXAMPLE. Let D be a division ring and let R = Mat„Z> (n > 1). For each
k (1 < k < n), Ik = (an) e R a {j =
                            |         \
                                                 for y     ^k   }   is   a simple left ^-module (see the           Having developed the necessary facts about simplicity we now turn to primitivity.
proof of Corollary VIII. 1.1 2).                                                                                In order to define primitive rings we need:


      EXAMPLE. The preceding example shows that Mat„D (D a division ring) is not
                                  1. However, the ring Mat n D (n > 1) is simple
a simple left module over itself if n >                                                                         Theorem 1.4. Let B be a subset of a left module A over a ring R. Then
by Exercise III. 2. 9. Thus by Theorem VII. 1.4 the endomorphism ring of any finite                             a(B) = r e R rb = 0/c>r<2//beBj is a left ideal of R. If B is a submodule ofA, then
                                                                                                                           {
                                                                                                                                  I




dimensional vector space over a division ring is a simple ring.                                                 Ct(B) is an ideal.


      EXAMPLE. A left ideal / of a ring R is said to be a minimal left ideal if / ^                      and          a(B) is called the (left) annihilator of B. The right annihilator of a right module is
for every left ideal J such that          CZ J   d   I,   either J =        or J =   I.   A left ideal / of R   defined analogously.
such that RI ^         is   a simple left /^-module if and only if / is a minimal left ideal.
                                                                                                                      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.4. It is easy to verify that d(B) is a left ideal. Let
      EXAMPLE. Let F be a field of characteristic zero and R the additive group of                              B be a submodule. If r e R and s e d(B), then for every b e B (sr)b = s(rb) =             since
polynomials F[x,y]. Define multiplication in R by requiring that multiplication be                              rb e B. Consequently, sr e d(B), whence &(B) is also a right ideal.
                                                                                v




418                                     CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                        1.       SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS                                                                                                                                                                               419



Definition 1.5.                  A {left) module A is faithful ifits (left) annihilator (2(A) is 0. A ring R                             EXAMPLE. Hom D (V,V) is a dense subring of itself. For if [u u     w„) is a                                                                                                                   .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,



is (left)   primitive // there exists a simple faithful left K-module.                                                                                                              U of V that contains u u
                                                                                                                                      linearly independent subset of V, then there is.a basis                     un                                                                                                                                           .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,


                                                                                                                                     by Theorem IV.2.4. If v u    v m £ V, then the map 6
                                                                                                                                                                      .   .       .       ,  V —± V defined by d(ui) = v                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        {


                                                                                                                                     and 6(u) =  for u e U — {u u       u n is a well-defined element of Hom D (Vy) by
       Right primitive rings are defined analogously. There do exist right primitive rings
                                                                                                                                                                                              .       .   .                    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                                     Theorems IV.2.1 and IV.2.4. In the finite dimensional case, Hom D (Vy) is the only
that are not left primitive (see G. Bergman [58]). Hereafter ''primitive" will always
                                                                                                                                      dense subring as we see in
mean "left primitive." However, all results proved for left primitive rings are true,
mutatis mutandis, for right primitive rings.


       EXAMPLE. Let V be a (possibly infinite dimensional) vector space over a divi-                                                 Theorem 1.9. Let R be a dense ring of endomorphisms of a vector space V over a
sion ring    D and let R be the endomorphism ring Hom D (Vy) of V. Recall that V is a                                                division ring D.   Then R is left [resp. right] Artinian if and only if dimvV is finite, in
left ^-module with 6v = d(v) for v s V, dzR (Exercise IV. 1 .7). If u is a nonzero                                                   which case R     = //owd(V,V).
vector in V, then there is a basis of V that contains u (Theorem IV.2.4). IfveV, then
there exists d v e R such that 6 v u = v (just define B v (u) = v and v (w) = for all other
                                                                                                                                         PROOF. If R is left Artinian and dim^Kis infinite, then there exists an infinite
basis elements w; then 6 V e R by Theorems IV.2.1 and IV.2.4). Therefore Ru = Vfor
                                                                                                                                     linearlyindependent subset \u u u        of V. By Exercise IV. 1.7 ^ is a left
any nonzero ueV, whence V has no proper i?-submodules. Since R has an identity,
                                                                                                                                                                           .}                                     2,       .       .




                                                                                                                                     Hom D (V, ^-module and hence a left /^-module. For each n let In be the left an-
RV 0. Thus V is a simple ^-module. If OV = (0 s /?)', then clearly = 0, whence
a(K) =    and Vis a faithful fl-module. Therefore, R is primitive. If Vis finite dimen-
                                                                                                                                     nihilator in R of the set u u
                                                                                                                                                                {
                                                                                                                                                                        un  By Theorem 1.4, A
                                                                                                                                                                              .       .       .   72
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,               }    .                                                            3                 3       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              is a             descending
                                                                                                                                     chain of left ideals of R. Let w be any nonzero element of V. Since                                                                                                                      uu                           u n+]
sional over D, then # is simple by Exercise III.2.9 and Theorem VII. 1.4. But if V is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,                   }       is

                                                                  z R such that Im d is
                                                                                                                                     linearly independent for each n and                                               R is dense, there exists                                                   e   R such that
infinite dimensional over D, then # is not simple: the set of all
finite dimensional subspace of V is a proper ideal of R (Exercise 3).                                                                                       =                                     = 1,2,                                                                                 = w 5* 0.
                                                                                                                                                      Bui           for                   i                                    .       .   .   ,   n    and         6u n+           i




       The next two results provide other examples of primitive rings.                                                               Consequently 6 e In but          ^ 7n+1                      .       Therefore h                                   3h3                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is       a properly descending

                                                                                                                                     chain, which is a contradiction. Hence dim^is finite.
                                                                                                                                        Conversely if dim D V is finite, then V has a finite basis v u vm   If /is any
Proposition                  1.6.       A simple ring R with identity is primitive.                                                                                                                                                                                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




                                                                                                                                     element of Hom D (Vy), then /is completely determined by its action on v u     vm                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,


                                                                                                                                     by Theorems IV.2.1 and IV.2.4. Since R is dense, there exists 6 e R such that
       PROOF. R contains a maximal left ideal / by Theorem III.2.18. Since R has an
identity / is regular, whence R/l is a simple /^-module by Theorem 1 .3. Since d(R/ 1)                                                                          0(vd = f(vd                                                    for                 /   = 1,2,   .   .   .       ,/w,
is an ideal of R that does not contain \ R a(R/I)
                                                     = by simplicity. Therefore R/l
                                                                        ,

                                                                                                                                     whence f = deR. Therefore Hom jD (F,f/ ) = tf. But                                                                                 Hom D (Vy) is Artinian by
is   faithful.
                                                                                                                                     Theorem VII. 1.4 and Corollary VIII. 1.12.

Proposition 1.7. A commutative ring R is primitive if and only ifR is afield.                                                           In order to prove that an arbitrary primitive ring is isomorphic to a dense ring of
                                                                                                                                     endomorphisms of a suitable vector space we need two lemmas.
       PROOF. A field is primitive by Proposition 1.6. Conversely, let A be a faithful
simple left ^-module. Then A                        ^
                                    R/I for some regular maximal left ideal / of R.
Since R is commutative, / is in fact an ideal and /                             C
                                                             d(R/I) = a(A) = 0. Since
7 =   is regular, there is an e e R such that r  =  re ( = er) for all r z R. Thus R is a                                            Lemma 1.10. (Schur) Let A be a simple module over a ring R and let B be any
                                           =       maximal,    R  is a field by Corollary
                                                                                                                                     K-module.
commutative ring   with  identity. Since /      is

III.2.21.                                                                                                                                 (i)   Every nonzero K-module homomorphism f                                                                      :   A — B is a monomorphism;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            »


                                                                                                                                         (ii)   every nonzero K-module homomorphism g                                                                      :   B —* A is an epimorphism;
       In order to characterize noncommutative primitive rings we need the concept                                                      (iii)   the endomorphism ring                         D = 7/owr(A,A) is a division ring.
of density.
                                                                                                                                          PROOF, (i) Ker /is a submodule of A and Ker /^ A since fj6 0. Therefore
                                                                                 R of                                                Ker / =     by simplicity, (ii) Im g is a nonzero submodule of A since g ^ 0, whence
Definition 1.8. Let V be a (left) vector space over a division ring D. A subring
                                                              endomorphisms ofV (or a                                                Im g = A by simplicity, (iii) If h z D and h ^ 0, then h is an isomorphism by (i) and
the endomorphism ring //o/w D (V,V) is called a dense ring of                                                                                                                  _1
                                                                                                                                     (ii). Thus / has a two-sided inverse /       £ \{om R (A,A) = D (see the paragraph after
dense subring o/77om D (V,V)) iffor every positive integer n, every linearly independent
                 u n ofW and every arbitrary subset                         {
                                                                                    u                   vn       ofV, there exists   Definition I V.l .2). Consequently every nonzero element of                                                                                        D is a unit, whence D is a
subset jui,      .   .   .
                             ,      j
                                                                                        .   .   .   ,        }

                                                                                                                                     division ring.
6 £ R such that 6(u0 = v (i = 1,2,     n).   £          .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                            m




420                              CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                                                   1.       SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS                                                                                                     421



      REMARK. If A is a simple /^-module, then A is a vector space over the division                                                                     r £ &(A)                   = 0. Therefore a is a monomorphism, whence R is isomorphic to the sub-
ring Hom R (A,A) with fa = f{a) (Exercise IV.1.7 and Lemma 1.10).                                                                                       ring Im a of                                    Hom D (A,A).
                                                                                                                                                                  To complete the proof we must show that Im a is a dense subring of Hom D (A,A).
                                                                                                                                                        Given a D-linearly independent subset U = [u u            un of A and an arbitrary sub-                                                       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,    \



                                                                                                                                                        set           v n of A we must find a r elma such that a r (ui) = v for / = 1,2,
Lemma 1.11. Let A be a simple module over a ring R. Consider A as a vector space                                                                             vu   {
                                                                                                                                                                            .   .       .       ,           j                                  n.                                                                                    {                   .       .       .   ,



                                                                                                                                                        For each / let V{ be the Z)-subspace of A spanned by {«!,..., u^ u u i+u            u n ).
over the division ring                D = //owr(A,A). IfV is a finite dimensional D-subspace of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,


                                                                                                                                                        Since U is Z)-linearly independent, u $ V Consequently, by Lemma 1.11 there exists
T>-vector space        A and a £ A — V, then there exists r £ R such that ra i£                                               and rV = 0.                                                                                                                      {               {.


                                                                                                                                                        r £ R such that r u ^
                                                                                                                                                         t                        and r Vi = 0. We next apply Lemma 1.11 to the zero sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    {       {                      {




      PROOF. The proof is by induction on n = d\m D V. If n = 0, then V =                                                                         and   space and the nonzero element        there exists Si e R such that j»r»w,- 5^
                                                                                                                                                        Since s r w ^ 0, the /?-submodule /?r w of A is nonzero, whence Rnui = A by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and s = 0.       w   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         {




a 7* 0. Since A is simple, A = Ra by Remark (iii) after Definition 1.1. Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                                            t   t           t                                                                              t       t


                                                                                                                                                        simplicity. Therefore exists / t £                                                             such that / r,-i/,- =                                          Let
there exists reR such that ra = a ^    and rV = rO = 0. Suppose dim^K = n >                                                                                                                                                                                                                t




and the theorem is true for dimensions less than n. Let                                   {
                                                                                              uu   .    .   .   ,   u n - U u] be a Z)-basis                                                                                              r   = riri + t r H           2       2                 h /«r„ e /?.
of V and let          W be the (n — l)-dimensional Z)-subspace spanned by u u w _i|                                       {
                                                                                                                                  .   .   .   ,   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      = tfi = 0. Consequently for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     u { z V j9 whence
(H^ =       if      n =    Then V = W © Du (vector space direct sum). Now W may not
                           1).
                                                                                                                                                        Recall that for                                             /       5^ y,                                              /,-ryM,-     £ tfcy])

                                                                                                                                                        each / =                                                            n
be an .R-submodule of A, but in any case the left annihilator / = <1{W) in R of W'is a
                                                                                                                                                                                    1,2,                .   .   .       ,




left ideal of R by Theorem 1.4. Consequently, Iu is an )?-submodule of A (Exercise                                                                                                                                              oiAMi)        = (hri H                              1-   tr,r n )ui       = UnUi = v        {.

IV.1.3). Since         ubA — W, the induction hypothesis implies that there exists reR
                                 and rW =            (that is, r e I = d(W)). Consequently                                            ^ ru e /w,        Therefore Im a is a dense ring of endomorphisms of the Z)-vector space A.
such that ru ^
whence /w ^ 0. Therefore                           = Iu by simplicity.
    fAfo/e: The contrapositive of the inductive argument used above shows that if
                                                                                                                                                           REMARK. The only point in the proof of Theorem 1 1 2 at which the faithfulness                                                                              .




v £ A and rv =     for all r £ /, then v e W.}                                                                                                          of A is used is to show that a: is a monomorphism. Consequently the proof shows
     We must find reR such that ra ^ and rK = 0. If no such r exists, then we can                                                                       that any ring that has a simple module A also has a homomorphic image that is a

define a map      A — ^ as follows. For ru e Iu = A let 0(rw) = razA.We claim that
                       :          >
                                                                                                                                                        dense ring of endomorphisms of the Z)-vector space A.
  is well defined. If    = r2 w (n £ / = (2(^0), then (n - r2 )w = 0, whence (n - r2 )K
= (n - r )(W© £>«) = 0. Consequently by hypothesis (n - r )a = 0. Therefore,
                2                                                                                                   2


0(r lU ) = ri a = r a = B{r u). Verify that
                           2             2  £ Hom^,^) = D. Then for every re I,                                                                         Corollary 1.13. IfR is a primitive ring, then for some division ring       either R is                                                                                               D
                                       - B(ru) - ra = r0(«) -                   = r(0(w) -                  </).
                                                                                                                                                        isomorphic to the endomorphism ring of a finite dimensional vector space over    or for                                     D
                                                                                                                                                        every positive integer                                                      m there is a subring R m ofR and an epimorphism of rings
Therefore 0(w) — a e                  W by the parenthetical Note above. Consequently                                                                   R — Homniy
                                                                                                                                                             IU       >                                         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vm)> where V m is an m-dimensional vector space over D.

                                        a = Bu - {Bu - a) Du + W = V,   e
                                                                                                                                                                  REMARK. The Corollary may also be phrased in terms of matrix rings over a
which contradicts the fact that a\V. Therefore, there exists r £ R such that ra ^                                                                       division ring via Theorem VII. 1.4.
and rK = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF OF 1.13. In the notation of Theorem 1.12,

Theorem 1.12. (Jacobson Density Theorem) Let R be a primitive ring and A a faithful
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hom D (A,A)
simple R-module. Consider A as a vector space over the division ring //owr(A,A) = D.                                                                    isa monomorphism such that R = Im a and Im a is dense in Hom D (A,A). If
Then R is isomorphic to a dense ring of endomorphisms of the T>-vector space A.                                                                         dim 7j^ = n is finite, then Ima = Hom^O^) by Theorem 1.9. If d\m D A is infinite
                                                                                                                                                        and {«i,« 2   .j is an infinite linearly independent set, let Vm be the m-dimensional
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,       .       .



      REMARK. A converse of Theorem 1.12 is also true, in fact in a much                                                                                D-subspace of A spanned by   uu                                                        {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u n Verify that R m = {r R rVm d Vm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ).                       a                    a       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 j       is
stronger form (Exercise 4).                                                                                                                             subring of R. Use the density of R                                                                         ^ Im a in Hom D (^,^) to show that the map
                                                                                                                                                        R m — Hom D {Vm ym ) given by r H a
                                                                                                                                                                      >                                                                                            r   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vm is a well-defined ring epimorphism.
      PROOF OF 1.12. For each r z R the map a                                    r   :   A -» A given by a (a) = ra is        r


easily seen to be a D-endomorphism of A                            :   that is, a r e    Hom c (^,/i). Furthermore for
all r,s £   R                                                                                                                                           Theorem 1.14. ( Wedderburn-Artin) The following conditions on a left Artinian ring R
                                                                               a rs = a r a                                                             are equivalent.
                                         a {r +s) = oc r + a   s       and                         s.




Consequently the map a                       :   R -+ Hom^^) defined by a(r) = a r is a well-defined                                                                  (i)   R is simple;
homomorphism                   of rings. Since         A is a faithful /^-module, a r = if and only if                                                            (ii)      R is primitive;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




422                        CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                        1.       SIMPLE AND PRIMITIVE RINGS                                                                                                             423


      (iii)R is isomorphic to the endomorphism ring of a nonzero finite dimensional               Proposition 1.17. For i = 1,2 let Vi be a vector space offinite dimension r\i over the
vector space    V over a division ring D;                                                         division ring Di.
      (iv) for some positive integer n, R is isomorphic to the ring of all n X n matrices

over a division ring.
                                                                                                            (i)         // there           is   an isomorphism of rings //owdi(Vi,Vi)                                                                 ^ ^wd (V ,V     2       2       2 ),      then
                                                                                                 dimr> \i       x
                                                                                                                  = dimr> ^2 and Di is isomorphic to D
                                                                                                                                       2                                                                                2.

                                                                                                            (ii) // there is an isomorphism of rings Mat n ^D ^ Mat n2 D                                                                               then n x = n 2 andDi is
    PROOF, (i) => (ii) We first observe that / = {r e R Rr = 0} is an ideal of R,
                                                                 |


                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y               2,

                                                                                                 isomorphic to                         2.
whence / = R or / = 0. Since R ^ 0, we must have 7=0. Since R is left Artinian
                                           2


the set of all nonzero left ideals of R contains a minimal left ideal /. J has no proper                   SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) For = 1,2 the example after Definition 1.5 shows         i

i?-submodules, (an i?-submodule of J is a left ideal of R). We claim that the left               that Vi      is a faithful simple Hom^K-^-module. Let R = Hom    (Fi,Fi) and let                                                                          Z) 1
annihilator &(J) of / in R is zero. Otherwise Gi(J) = R by simplicity and Ru =             for
every nonzero u e /. Consequently, each such nonzero u is contained in / = 0, which
                                                                                                                                    a R -> Hom D2 (V ,V )                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2   2


is a contradiction. Therefore a(J) =     and RJ           ^
                                                   0. Thus J is a faithful simple                be an isomorphism. Then V2 is a faithful simple i?-module by pullback along a (that
/^-module, whence R is primitive.                                                                is,       rv       = a(r)v for r e R, v e V ). By Lemma 1.15 there is an /^-module isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                              2

      (ii) => (iii)   By Theorem 1.12 R is isomorphic to a dense ring Tof endomorphisms          <f>
                                                                                                       :   Vi       — V *    2.   For each veVi and fe R,
of a vector space          V over a division ring D. Since R is left Artinian, R^T =
Homi>(F,F) by Theorem 1 .9.                                                                                                                                  *[/(»)] =                       Mv) = {*f)Wp)l
      (iii) <=» (iv)   Theorem VII. 1.4.                                                         whence
       (iv) => (i) Exercise III.2.9.                                                                                                                                                  <t>f<t>~
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         = *(/)
                                                                                                 as a homomorphism of additive groups V2    V For each de A let a d V —> be                                                  2.                                           :       {          J/,-

      We close this section by proving that for a simple left Artinian ring R the integers       the homomorphism of additive groups defined by x |->     Clearly a d = if and only
dim D V and n in Theorem 1.14 are uniquely determined and the division rings in                  if d = 0. For every /£  = Homz^Fi,)^) and every £ A,/<*d = a d f Consequently,
Theorem 1.14 (iii) and (iv) are determined up to isomorphism. We need two lemmas.
                                                                                                                   [tfxx^Kaf) = (txxdt-^fa- = <t>a d /(/T = ^tfr                                                   1                      1                 1




Lemma 1.15. Let V be a finite dimensional vector space over a division ring D. // A              Since o- is surjective, Lemma 1.16 (with F =                                                              F # = <j)a d 4r ) implies that there exists
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l



and B are simple faithful modules over the endomorphism ring R = //0/wd(V,V), then               d* £ Z> 2 such that ^o^                          -1
                                                                                                                                                         = a d *. Let r                          :       A -> Z) be the map given by r(^/) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2

A and B are isomorphic R-modules.                                                                Then for every de A,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 _1
                                                                                                                                                                                  </><Xd0                 = a T (d).
   PROOF. By Theorems VIL1.4, VIII.1.4 and Corollary VIII. 1.12, the ring R
contains a (nonzero) minimal left ideal /. Since A is faithful, there exists a e A such
                                                                                                 Verify that r is a monomorphism of rings. Reversing the roles of       and      in the                                                                    A                      A
                                                                                                 preceding argument (and replacing </>,o- by (/rV -1 ) yields for every k e D 2 an ele-
that la 5* 0. Thus la is a nonzero submodule of A (Exercise IV. 1 .3), whence la =          A
                                                                                                 ment de D such that
by simplicity. The map 6 / —> la = A given by i
                                    :                      H
                                                ia is a nonzero /^-module epi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             — Vu
morphism. By Lemma 1.10 6 is an isomorphism. Similarly I   B.         =                                                                                           <t>~
                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                                              a k 4> = a d                     :   Fi

                                                                                                 whence ak = <t>a d <pr l = a T(d) Consequently ^ = r(</) and hence r is surjective.
                                                                                                                                                              .




                                                                                                 Therefore r is an isomorphism. Furthermore for every de       and £ Vu                                                                           A        i?


Lemma 1.16. Let V be a nonzero vector space over a division ring D and let R be the                                                                          = 4>a d (v) = a T d )<t>(v) = T(d)<t>(v).
                                                                                                                                                 <t>(dv)
endomorphism ring //owd(V,V). If g V — V is a homomorphism of additive groups
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                               :   *

such that gr = rg for allreR, then there exists d £       D such that g(v) = dv for all v e V.   Use this fact to show that u u                          {
                                                                                                                                                                  .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                  ,   uk     j   is A-Hnearly independent in                     V if and only if Y


                                                                                                 |0(wi),            .
                                                                                                                        .   .,<t>(u k ) \ is A-linearly independent in                                                      F It follows that dim^Fi = dimz> F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.                                                               2    2.


    PROOF. Let u be a nonzero element of V. We claim that u and g(u) are linearly                          (ii)         Use (i), Exercise 111.1.17(e) and Theorem VII.1.4.
dependent over D. If dim D V = 1, this is trivial. Suppose dim D V > 2 and u, g(u)} is
                                                                                   {



linearly independent. Since R is dense in itself (Example after Definition 1.8), there
exists r e R such that r(u) =  and r(g(u)) ^ 0. But by hypothesis                                                                                                             EXERCISES
                                                                                                 1 .       Let F be a field of characteristic
                                                                                                                                           and R = F[x,y] the additive group of poly-
                          r(g(u))   = rg(u) = gr(u) = g(r(u)) = g(0) = 0,
                                                                                                       nomials in two indeterminates. Define multiplication in R by requiring that
which is a contradiction. Therefore for some d e          A
                                                      g{u) = du. If v £ V, then there                  multiplication be distributive, that ax = xa, ay = ya for all a e F, that the
exists s £ R such that s(u) = v by density. Consequently, since s e R = Hom D (V,V),                   product of x and y (in that order) be the polynomial xy as usual, but that the
g(v)    = g(s(u)) = gs(u) = sg(u) = s(du) = ds(u) = dv.                                                product of y and x be the polynomial xy                                                                         +     1
424                                           CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                2.   THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                 425



           (a)      R is a ring.                                                                                                                                   Before pursuing further our study of the structure of rings, we summarize the
                                                         ~x                             ~l
           (b)      yx k = x ky + kx k                        and y k x = xy k + ky k           .
                                                                                                                                                             general technique that we shall use. There is little hope at present of classifying all
           (c)      R is simple. {Hint: Let / be a nonzero element in an ideal / of R; then                                                                  rings up to isomorphism. Consequently we shall attempt to discover classes of rings

      either /has no terms involving _v org =         xf— fx is a nonzero element of / that                                                                  for which some reasonable structure theorems are obtainable. Here is a classic
      has lower degree in y than does                                / In the latter case, consider xg — gx. Eventually,                                     method of determining such a class. Single out some "bad" or "undesirable"
      find a nonzero h e /, which is free of y. If h is nonconstant, consider hy                                                               — yh. In a    property of rings and study only those rings that do not have this property. In order
      finite        number of steps, obtain a nonzero constant element of /; hence / =R.)                                                                    to make this method workable in practice one must make some additional as-

           (d)      R has no zero divisors.                                                                                                                  sumptions.
              (e)   R is not a division ring.                                                                                                                      Let P be a property of rings and call an ideal [ring] / a P-ideal [P-ring] if / has
                                                                                                                                                             property P. Assume that
2.    (a) If        A is an P-module, then A is also a well-defined P/(i(^)-module with
      (r      +           = ra(az A).                                                                                                                                (i)   the homomorphic image of a P-ring is a P-ring;
      (b) If ^4 is a simple left P-module, then R/d(A) is a primitive ring.                                                                                        (ii)    every ring R (or at least every ring in some specified class (3) contains a
                                                                                                                                                                           P-ideal P(R) (called the P-radical of R) that contains all other P-ideals of R   ;

3.    Let V be an infinite dimensional vector space over a division ring D.                                                                                        (iii)   the P-radical of the quotient ring R/P(R) is zero;
        (a) If Pis the set of all 6 s Hom D (V,V) such that Im 0is finite dimensional, then
                                                                                                                                                                   (iv)    the P-radical of the ring P(P) is P(P).
      F is a proper ideal of Hom z>(K,K). Therefore Y\om D (yy) is not simple.
        (b) F is itself a simple ring.                                                                                                                       A property P that satisfies (i)—(iv) is called a radical property.
           (c)      Fis contained in every nonzero ideal of Wovc\ D (V,V).                                                                                         The P-radical may be thought of as measuring the degree to which a given ring
           (d)      Uom D (Vy) is not (left) Artinian.                                                                                                       possesses the "undesirable" property P. If we have chosen a radical property P, we
                                                                                                                                                             then attempt to find structure theorems for those "nice" rings whose P-radical is
4.   Let V be a vector space over a division ring D. A subring R of Hom/X^/) is said                                                                         zero. Such a ring is said to be P-radical free or P-semisimple. In actual practice we are
     to be n-fold transitive if for every k (1 < k < n) and every linearly independent
                                                                                                                                                             usually more concerned with the P-radical itself rather than the radical property P
      subset        {
                        uu   .   .   .
                                         ,
                                             uk   \   of Kand every arbitrary subset                {
                                                                                                        vu   .   .   .
                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                             vk ]       of V, there exists
                                                                                                                                                             from which it arises. By condition (iii) every ring that has a P-radical has a P-semi-
          s R such that 0(w,) = v for = 1,2,              {      /
                                                                                                                                                             simple quotient ring. Thus the larger P-radical is, the more one discards (or factors
           (a) If P is one-fold transitive, then R is primitive. [Hint: examine the example
                                                                                                                                                             out) when studying P-semisimple rings. The basic problem is to find radicals that en-
     after Definition 1.5.]
                                                                                                                                                             able us to discard as little as possible and yet to obtain reasonably deep structure
       (b) If R is two-fold transitive, then R is dense in Hom D (V,V). [Hints: Use (a) to
                                                                                                                                                             theorems.
     show that R is a dense subring of Hom A (K,K), where A = Hom R (V,V). Use two-                                                                                Wedderburn first introduced a radical in the study of finite dimensional algebras.
     fold transitivity to show that A = fi d d e D         where ft V —> K is given by      ,                                :
                                                                                                                                                             His results were later extended to
                                                                           {            j
                                                                                                                                                                                              (left) Artinian rings. However, the radical of
                                                                               \




     xH^/x. Consequently Hom A (K,K) = Hom^K).]                                                                                                              Wedderburn (namely the maximal nilpotent ideal) and the remarkably strong struc-
5.   IfR is a primitive ring such that for all a,b e P, a(ab — bd) = (ab — ba)a, then R                                                                      ture theorems that resulted applied only to (left) Artinian rings. In subsequent years

     isa division ring. [Hint: show that R is isomorphic to a dense ring of endomor-                                                                         many other radicals were introduced. Generally speaking each of these coincided
     phisms of a vector space V over a division ring D with &\m D V = 1, whence                                                                              with the radical of Wedderburn in the left Artinian case, but were also defined for

      R^D.]                                                                                                                                                  non-Artinian rings.
                                                                                                                                                                   The chief purpose of this section is to study one such radical, the Jacobson
6.    If   R is a primitive ring with identity and e e R is such that e = e ^ 0, then                                               2
                                                                                                                                                             radical.  Another radical, the prime radical, is discussed in Section 4; see also Ex-
            eRe is a subring of P, with identity
           (a)                                                                                                                                               ercise 4.1 1 For an extensive treatment of radicals see N. J. Divinsky [22] or M. Gray
                                                                                                                                                                             .




        (b) eRe is primitive, [///a?/: if R is isomorphic to a dense ring of endomorphisms                                                                   [23]. The host of striking theorems that have resulted from its use provide ample
     of the vector space V over a division ring D, then Ve is a D-vector space and eRe                                                                       justification for studying the Jacobson radical in some detail. Indeed Section 1 was
     is isomorphic to a dense ring of endomorphisms of Ve.}                                                                                                  developed with the Jacobson radical in mind. Rings that are Jacobson semisimple
                                                                                                                                                             (that is, have zero Jacobson radical) can be described in terms of simple and primi-
7.   If    R is a dense ring of endomorphisms of a vector space V and A' is a nonzero
                                                                                                                                                             tive rings (Section 3).
     ideal of R, then A' is also a dense ring of endomorphisms of V.
                                                                                                                                                                   Two preliminaries are needed before we define the Jacobson radical.


                                                                                                                                                             Definition 2.1.        An ideal P of a ring R is said to be left [resp. right] primitive if the
2.   THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                                                                                                                    quotient ring R/P is a left [resp. right] primitive ring.
     The Jacobson radical is defined (Theorem 2.3) and its basic properties are de-
veloped (Theorems 2.12-2.16). The interrelationships of simple, primitive, and semi-                                                                               REMARK. Since the zero ring has no simple modules and hence is not primitive,
simple rings are examined (Theorem 2.10) and numerous examples are given.                                                                                    R itself is not a left (or right) primitive ideal.
426                         CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                             2.   THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                 427



Definition 2.2.    An element a in a ring R is said to be left quasi-regular // there exists               e e R). If /C J and e e J, then r — re e / C J implies r e J for every r e R, whence
r e   R such that r + a + ra = 0. The element r is called a left quasi-inverse of a. A                     R =     Use this fact to verify that Zorn's Lemma is applicable to the set S of all left
(right, left or two-sided) ideal I ofR is said to be left quasi-regular // every element of I              ideals L such that / C L C R, partially ordered by inclusion. A maximal element of

is left quasi-regular.  Similarly, a e R is said to be right quasi-regular // there exists
                                                                                                           S is a regular maximal left ideal containing /.
r e   R such that a + r + ar = 0. Right quasi-inverses and right quasi-regular ideals are
defined analogously.


   REMARKS. It is sometimes convenient to write r ° a for r + a + ra. If R has                             Lemma 2.5. Let R be a ring and let K be the intersection of all regular maximal left
an identity, then a is left [resp. right] quasi-regular if and only if \ R + a is left [resp.             ideals ofR. Then      K is a left quasi-regular left ideal ofR.
right] invertible (Exercise 1).

                                                                                                              PROOF. K is obviously a left ideal. If a e K let T = r + ra r e R If T = R,
                                                                                                                                                                                {   \   }   .


      In order to simplify the statement of several results, we shall adopt the following
convention (which is actually a theorem of axiomatic set theory).
                                                                                                          then there exists r e R such that r   + ra = —a. Consequently r + a + ra = and
                                                                                                          hence a is left quasi-regular. Thus it suffices to show that T = R.
      // the class C of those subsets of a ring R that satisfy a given property is empty, then
                                                                                                              Verify that Tis a regular left ideal of R (with e = —a). If T 5* R, then Tis con-
f) I is defined to be R.                                                                                  tained in a regular maximal left ideal 7 by Lemma 2.4. (Thus T 9^ R is impossible if
JeC
                                                                                                          R has no regular maximal left ideals.) Since a e K C 7 ra e 7 for all r e R. Thus
                                                                                                                                                                            ,



                                                                                                          since r + ra e T C 7 we must have r e 7 for all r e R. Consequently, R = 7 which
                                                                                                                                   ,                                                            ,


Theorem 2.3. // R is a ring, then there is an ideal J(R) of R such that:                                  contradicts the maximality of 7 Therefore T = R.
                                                                                                                                                .




       (i)    J(R) is the intersection of all the left annihilators of simple left K-modules;
      (ii)    J(R) is the intersection of all the regular maximal left ideals ofR',
      (iii)   J(R)   is   the   intersection   of   all   the   left   primitive    ideals   of R;        Lemma 2.6. Let R be a ring that has a simple left R-module. If I is a left quasi-
      (iv)    J(R) is a left quasi-regular left ideal which contains every left quasi-regular             regular left ideal of R, then I is contained in the intersection of all the left annihila-
left ideal ofR,                                                                                           tors of simple left R-modules.
       (v)    Statements (i)-(iv) are also true if "left" is replaced by "right".

      Theorem 2.3 is proved below (p. 428). The ideal J(R) is called the Jacobson                            PROOF. If 7 jzf fl &(A), where the intersection is taken over all simple left
radical of the ring R. Historically it was first defined in terms of quasi-regularity                     P-modules A, then IB ^     for some simple left 7?-module B, whence lb ^       for

(Theorem 2.3 (iv)), which turns out to be a radical property as defined in the intro-                     some nonzero b e B. Since 7 is a left ideal, lb is a nonzero submodule of B. Con-
ductory remarks above (see p. 431). As the importance of the role of modules in the                       sequently B = lb by simplicity and hence ab = —b for some a el. Since 7 is left

study of rings became clearer the other descriptions of J(R) were developed (Theo-                        quasi-regular, there exists   reR such that r + a + ra = 0. Therefore, = Ob
rem 2.3 (i)-(iii)).                                                                                       = (r + a + ra)b = rb + ab + rab = rb — b — rb = —b. Since this conclusion
                                                                                                          contradicts the fact that b 9^ 0, we must have / C fl Q(A). m
      REMARKS. According to Theorem 2.3 (i) and the convention adopted above,
J(R) = R if R has no simple left P-modules (and hence no annihilators of same). If R
has an identity, then every ideal is regular and maximal                     left   ideals always exist
                                                                                                          Lemma 2.7. An ideal P ofa ring R is left primitive ifand only ifP is the left annihila-
(Theorem III. 2. 18), whence J(R) ^ R by Theorem 2.3(h). Theorem 2.3(iv) does not
                                                                                                          tor of a simple left R-module.
imply that J(R) contains every left quasi-regular element of R; see Exercise 4.


   The proof of Theorem 2.3 (which begins on p. 428) requires five preliminary                                  PROOF. If P is a left primitive ideal, let A be a simple faithful 7?/P-module.
lemmas. The lemmas are stated and proved for left ideals. However, each ofLemmas                          Verify that A is an 7?-module, with ra (r e R,a e A) defined to be (r + P)a. Then
2.4-2.8 is valid with "left" replaced by "right" throughout. Examples are given after
                                                                                                          RA = (R/P)A ?±      and every 7?-submodule of A is an 7?/P-submodule of A, whence
the proof of Theorem 2.3.
                                                                                                          A is a simple 7?-module. If reR, then rA = if and only if (r + P)A = 0. But
                                                                                                          (r + P)A =    if and only if r e P since A is a faithful 7?/P-module. Therefore ,P is the

                                                                                                          left annihilator of the simple 7?-module A.

Lemma 2.4. If I (^R) is a regular left ideal of a ring R, then I is contained in a                              Conversely suppose that P is the left annihilator of a simple 7?-module B. Verify
maximal left ideal which is regular.                                                                      that B is a simple 7?/P-module with (r + P)b = rb for r e R,beB. Furthermore if
                                                                                                          (r   + P)B = 0, then rB = 0, whence r e d(B) = P and r + P = in R/P. Conse-
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Since / is regular, there exists e e R such that r - re e I                        quently, B is a faithful 7?/P-module. Therefore R/P is a left primitive ring, whence P
for all r e R. Thus any left ideal J containing / is also regular (with the same element                  is   a left primitive ideal of R.
428                            CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                            2.   THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                                      429


Lemma 2.8. Let I be a left ideal of a ring R. If I is left quasi-regular, then I is right                                          EXAMPLE. The power series ring F[[x]] over a field F is a local ring with
quasi-regular.                                                                                                               principal maximal ideal (x) by Corollary III. 5. 10. Therefore J(F[[x]]) = (x).


  PROOF. If / is left quasi-regular and a e /, then there exists reR such that                                                     EXAMPLE. If p is prime, thenZ^ (n > 2) is a local ring with principal maximal
roa = r + a + ra = 0. Since r = —a — ra £ /, there exists s e R such that                                                    ideal (/?), which is isomorphic as an abelian group to                          ZpU -\. Therefore J(Zpn) =   (/?).

sor = s + r + sr = 0, whence s is right quasi-regular. The operation o is easily                                             The radical of Zm (m arbitrary) is considered in Exercise 10.
seen to be associative. Consequently

                          fl   =      o     = (j o   /*)   o fl   = 5o   (/*   o fl)   = 5o    = 5.
                                                                                                                             Definition 2.9.      A ring R is said to be (Jacobson) semisimple // its Jacobson radical
Therefore a, and hence /, is right quasi-regular.                                                                            J(R) is zero. R is said to be a radical ring //J(R) = R.


                                                                                                                                 REMARK. Throughout this book "radical" always means "Jacobson radical"
                                                                                                                             and "semisimple" always means "Jacobson semisimple." When reading the literature
      PROOF OF THEOREM 2.3. Let J(R) be the intersection of all the left an-                                                 in ring theory, one must determine which notion of radical and semisimplicity is
nilators of simple left ^-modules. If R has no simple left ^-modules, then 7(7?) =                                     R     being used in a particular theorem. A number of definitions of radical (and semi-
by the convention adopted above. J(R) is an ideal by Theorem 1.4. We now show                                                simplicity) require that the ring be (left) Artinian. This is not the case with the Jacob-
that statements (ii)-(iv) are true for all left ideals.                                                                      son radical, which is defined for every ring.
   We first observe that R itself cannot be the annihilator of a simple left /^-module
A (otherwise RA = 0). This fact together with Theorem 1.3 and Lemma 2.7 implies                                                    EXAMPLE. Every division ring is semisimple by Theorem 2.3 (ii) since the only
that the following conditions are equivalent:                                                                                regular maximal left ideal is the zero ideal.

      (a)    J(R) = R;
      (b) R has no simple left R -modules;                                                                                      EXAMPLE. Every maximal ideal in Z is of the form (p) with p prime by Theo-
      (c) R has no regular maximal left ideals;                                                                              rem III. 3. 4. Consequently, J(Z) = f) (/?) = 0, whence Z is Jacobson semisimple.
                                                                                                                                                                      v
      (d) R has no left primitive ideals.
                                                                                                                             For a generalization, see Exercise 9.
Therefore by the convention adopted above, (ii), (iii), and (iv) are true if J(R) = R.
     (ii) Assume J(R) ^ R and let K be the intersection of all the regular maximal                                                 EXAMPLE. If D is a division ring, then the polynomial ring
left ideals of/?. Then K              C
                         J{R) by Lemmas 2.5 and 2.6. Conversely suppose czJ(R).
                                                                                                                                                                 R = D[x u x                        xm
                                                                                                                                                                               2,   .   .   .

By Theorem 1 .3, J(R) is the intersection of the left annihilators of the quotients R/I,
                                                                                                                                                                                                ,        ]




where / funs over all regular maximal left ideals of R. For each regular maximal                                             is semisimple.     For if feJ(R), then /is both right and left quasi-regular by Theorem
ideal / there exists e e R such that c                       — cezl. Since c e 6l(R/I), cr e / for all r e R;                2.3 (iv). Consequently \ R    + f = \ D + /is a unit in R by Exercise 1. Since the only
in particular, ce e /. Consequently, c e / for every regular                                  maximal ideal /. Thus          units in R are the nonzero elements of  D (see Theorem III. 6.1), it follows that fe D.
J(R)    C     PI /   = K. Therefore J(R) = K.                                                                                Thus J(R) is an ideal of D, whence J(R) =       or J(R) = D by the simplicity of D.
      (iii) is   an immediate consequence of Lemma 2.7.                                                                      Since - D is not left quasi-regular (verify!), — D $ J(R). Therefore J(R) =
                                                                                                                                          \                                                 \                 and R
      (iv)   J(R) is a left quasi-regular left ideal by (ii) and Lemma 2.5. J(R) contains                                    is   semisimple.
every left quasi-regular left ideal by Lemma 2.6.
      To complete the proof we must show that (i)-(iv) are true with "right" in place of
"left."      Let MR) be the intersection of the right annihilators of all simple right                                       Theorem 2.10. Let R be a ring.
/^-modules. Then the preceding proof is valid with "right" in place of "left," whence
(i)-(iv) hold for the ideal J,(R). Since J(R) is right quasi-regular by (iv) and Lemma                                              (i)  //R is primitive, then R is semisimple.
2.8, J(R)        C MR) by          (iv).   Similarly J^R) is left quasi-regular, whence Ji(R)                 C J(R).              (ii)  IfR is simple and semisimple, then R is primitive.
Therefore, J(R) = Ji(R).                                                                                                           (iii) IfR is simple, then R is either a primitive semisimple or a radical ring.




      EXAMPLE. Let R be a local ring with unique maximal ideal M (consisting of all                                             PROOF, (i) R has a faithful simple left ^-module A, whence J(R) d d(A) = 0.
nonunits of R; see Theorem III.4.13). We shall show that J(R) = M. Since R has an                                                (ii) R      by simplicity. There must exist a simple left R -module A; (otherwise
identity, J(R) ^ R. Since a proper ideal contains only nonunits by Theorem III.3.2,                                          by Theorem 2.3 (i)J(R) = R ^ 0, contradicting semisimplicity). The left annihilator
J(R)    C M. On the other hand                  if r £     M, then \ R + r \M (otherwise \ R e M). Conse-                    &(A) is an ideal of R by Theorem 1.4 and GL(A) ^ R (since RA ^ 0). Consequently
quently, \ R         + r is a unit, whence r         is left quasi-regular (Exercise 1).              Thus   M (=   ./(/*)   &(A) =     by simplicity, whence A is a simple faithful i?-module. Therefore R is
by Theorem 2.3 (iv). Therefore J(R) = M. Here are two special cases:                                                         primitive.
430                                  CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                        2.       THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                  431



      (iii)R is simple then the ideal J(R) is either R or zero. In the former case R is a
              If                                                                                                                      sequently J k a = 7               by minimality. Thus for some nonzero r £ /*, ra = a. Since
radical ring and in the latter R is semisimple and primitive by (ii).
                                                                                                                                      — r e/* C J(R), — r is left quasi-regular, whence s — r — sr =                      for       some s e R.
                                                                                                                                     Consequently,

      EXAMPLES. The endomorphism ring of a (left) vector space over a division ring                                                                       a — ra = —[ — ra] = —[ — ra   + 0] = —[ — ra + sa — sa]
issemisimple by Theorem 2.10 (i) and the example after Definition 1.5. Conse-                                                                                 = —[ — ra + sa — s(ra)] = — — r + s — sr]a = —0a = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       [

quently by Theorem VII. 1.4 the ring of all n X n matrices over a division ring is
semisimple.                                                                                                                          This contradicts the fact that a 9^ 0. Therefore /* = 0. The last statement of the
                                                                                                                                     theorem is now an immediate consequence of Theorem 2.12.
      EXAMPLE. An example of a simple radical ring is given in E. Sasiada and
P. M. Cohn [66].                                                                                                                           Finally we wish to show that left quasi-regularity is a radical property as defined
                                                                                                                                     in the introduction to this section. By Theorem 2.3 (iv) its associated radical is clearly

      The classical radical of Wedderburn (in a left Artinian ring) is the maximal nil-                                              the Jacobson radical and a left quasi-regular ring is precisely a radical ring (Defini-

potent ideal. We now explore the connection between this radical and the Jacobson                                                    tion 2.9). Since a ring homomorphism necessarily maps left quasi-regular elements

radical.                                                                                                                             onto left quasi-regular elements, the homomorphic image of a radical ring is also a
                                                                                                                                     radical ring. To complete the discussion we must show that R/J(R) is semisimple and
                                                                                                                                     that J(R) is a radical ring.

Definition 2.11.                 An element           a.   of a ring R is nilpotent if a n =       for some positive
integer n. A (left, right, two-sided) ideal I ofR is nil if every element of I is nilpotent; I
                                                                                                                                     Theorem 2.14. 7/R is a ring, then the quotient ring R/J(R) is semisimple.
is nilpotent z/I
                     n   =           for some integer n.

                                                                                                                                           PROOF. Let 7r R—> R/J(R) be the canonical epimorphism and denote 7r(r) by
                                                                                                                                                                    :

   Every nilpotent ideal is nil since In =   implies a n =  for all ae Lit is possible,
                                                                                                                                                6 be the set of all regular maximal left ideals of R. If 7 £ C, then J(R) C 7
                                                                                                                                     f (r £ R). Let
however, to have a nil ideal that is  not nilpotent (Exercise 11).
                                                                                                                                     by Theorem 2.3 (ii) and ir(I) = I/J(R) is a maximal left ideal of R/J(R) by Theorem
                                                                                                                                     IV.l.lO.If £?ei*is such that r - re e I for all r e R, then f - re ett(I) for all r s R/J(R).
                                                                                                                                     Therefore, w(I) is regular for every 7 in (3. Since J(R) =            O/   it is easy to verify that if

Theorem 2.12. IfR is a ring, then every nil right or left ideal is contained in the
radical J(R).
                                                                                                                                     f £   H
                                                                                                                                           ieC
                                                                                                                                                  ir(J)   = D I/AR\ then r e J(R). Consequently, by Theorem 2.3 (ii) (applied to
                                                                                                                                                              lee
                                                                                                                                     R/JV0)
      REMARK. The theorem immediately implies that every nil ring is a radical ring.
                                                                                                                                                                          J(R/J(R))        c n <D c         = 0,
      PROOF OF 2.12. If                            = 0, let            r = —a + a — a*-\
                                                  n
                                                                                        h (-lY^a"'
                                                                                 2                                           1
                                              a                                                                                  .



                                                                                                                                     whence R/J(R) is semisimple.
Verify that r      + a + ra =                     = a + r + ar, whence a is both left and right quasi-
regular. Therefore every nil left [right] ideal is left [right] quasi-regular and hence is
contained in J(R) by Theorem 2.3 (iv).
                                                                                                                                     Lemma 2.15. Let R be a ring and a £ R.
                                                                                                                                            (i)    If — a 2 is left quasi-regular, then so is a.
Proposition 2.13. IfR is a left [resp. right] Artinian ring, then the radical J(R) is a                                                    (ii)    a £ J(R) // and only //Ra is a left quasi-regular left ideal.

nilpotent ideal. Consequently every nil left or right ideal ofR is nilpotent and J(R) is the
unique maximal nilpotent left (or right) ideal ofR.                                                                                        PROOF,       If r + (-a
                                                                                                                                                              (i)      + K-tf = 0, let s = r - a - ra.
                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                   )                               Verify   that
                                                                                                                                     s    + a + sa = 0, whence a is left quasi-regular.
      REMARK. If R is left [resp. right] Noetherian, then every nil left or right ideal                                                 (ii) If a £ J(R), then Ra             C
                                                                                                                                                                    J(R). Therefore, Ra is left quasi-regular since J(R) is.

is   nilpotent (Exercise 16).                                                                                                        Conversely suppose Ra is left quasi-regular. Verify that K = {ra               +
                                                                                                                                                                                                          na r e R, n e Z)     \




                                                                                                                                     is   a left ideal of R that contains a and Ra. If s = ra              + na, then — s e Ra. By hy-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



      PROOF OF 2.13. Let J = J(R) and consider                                       the   chain   of           (left)   ideals      pothesis        — s is left quasi-regular and hence so is s by (i). Thus K is a left quasi-
                                                                                                                                                          2



J ZD J 2 ZD / 3 ZD       •   •
                                 .   By hypothesis there exists k such that J* = /* for all / > k. We
                                                                                                                                     regular left ideal. Therefore ae        K C J(R) by Theorem 2.3 (iv).
claim that /* = 0. If /* 9* 0, then the set S of all left ideals / such that J I ^
                                                                                                        k
                                                                                   is non-

empty (since/*/* = J lk = /* 9± 0). By Theorem VIII. 1.4 5 has a minimal element 7                                               .



                                                                                                                                     Theorem 2.16. (i) If an ideal I of a ring R is itself considered as a ring, then
Since /*7 ^ 0, there is a nonzero ash such that J a 5^ 0. Clearly J a is a left ideal of
                                                       k                  k

                                                                                                                                     j(i) - i n j(R).
R that is contained in 7                 .   Furthermore J a eS since J (J a) = J a = J a ^ 0. Con-
                                                                   k             k   k       2h             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .




432                                       CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                             2.       THE JACOBSON RADICAL                                                                433



        (ii)       IfR is semisimple, then so is every ideal ofR.                                                                                              5.   If    R has an identity, then
       (iii)       J(R) is a radical ring.                                                                                                                               (a) J(R) = r e R
                                                                                                                                                                                        {      R + sr is left invertible for all s e R
                                                                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                    \                                                                      }



                                                                                                                                                                         (b) J(R) is the largest ideal                    K such that for all r e K,               \   R   + r is a unit.
   PROOF, (i) / fl J(R) is clearly an ideal of /. If a e / fl J(R), then a is left quasi-                                                                     6. (a)          The homomorphic image of a semisimple ring need not be semisimple.
regular in R, whence r + a + ra =      for some r e R. But r = —a — ra e /. Thus
                                                                                                                                       d J(I) by                    (b) If /:/?-> 5 is a ring epimorphism, then /(/(./?))                                 c 7(5).
every element of / fl J(R) is left quasi-regular in /. Therefore / fl J(R)
Theorem 2.3 (iv) (applied to /).                                                                                                                              7. If      is the ring of all rational numbers with odd denominators, then /OR) consists

     Suppose azJ(l). For any r e R, -(ra) 2 = -(rar)a e //(/)     7(7), whence -(ra)
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                    C                                               of all rational numbers with odd denominator and even numerator.
is left quasi-regular in / by Theorem 2.3 (iv). Consequently by Lemma 2.15 (i) ra is
                                                                                                                                                              8.    Let R be the ring of all upper triangular n X n matrices over a division ring D
left quasi-regular in / and hence in R. Thus Ra is a left quasi-regular left ideal of R,

                                                                                                                        d                                           (see Exercise VII. 1.2).            Find J(R) and prove that R/J(R) is isomorphic to the
whence a e ./(#) by Lemma 2.15 (ii). Therefore a e J(I) f) J(R)      I    J(R). Conse-
                                                                                                                                                                                product D X D X                          X D (n factors). [Hint: show that a strictly tri-
quently J(I)                did
                      J(R), which completes the proof that J(I) = I fl J(R). State-
                                                                                                                                                                    direct                                   •   •   •




                                                                                                                                                                    angular matrix is nilpotent.]
ments (ii) and (iii) are now immediate consequences of (i).
                                                                                                                                                              9.    A principal ideal domain R is semisimple if and only if R is a field or R contains
                                                                                                                                                                    an infinite number of distinct nonassociate irreducible elements.
Theorem 2.17. //{Ri                             |
                                                    i   e II       is a family    of rings, then j(YL R ) = YL J(R ).
                                                                                                                    {                     {

                                                                                                             iel              iel                            10.    Let D be a principal ideal domain and d a nonzero nonunit element of D. Let R
                                                                                                                                                                    be the quotient ring D/(d).
    SKETCH OF PROOF. Verify that an element {a e                                                                        is left     quasi-regular                     (a) R is semisimple if and only if d is the product of distinct nonassociate
                                                          ^
                                                                                                   { \


in YL R if an d onlv ^ s quasi-regular in R for each                                                                Consequently IX/(/?0                            irreducible elements of D. [Hint: Exercise VIII. 1.2.]
                                                                                        Wc
               i                            fl * *                                        {                    /.


is   a left quasi-regular ideal of TL R i, whence YLJ                                                  ^(11^) b Theorem 2.3 (iv).
                                                                                                                         >'
                                                                                                                                                                         (b)   What is /(/?)?
       For each k e /,                    let       7r*       :
                                                                  H^i —>          be the canonical projection. Verify that
Ik    = ^(7(11^)) is a left quasi-regular ideal of R k                                        .   It     follows that Ik            d J(R     k)       and   11. If p is a prime, let        R be the subring ^2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          n>\        n>\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             °f II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n>\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZP   *-       Tne i^ ea l 1 =           ^
                            IIW).
                                r

therefore that J (^^^)
                                                                                                                                                                    where /„ is the ideal of Zpn generated by p e Zpn is a nil ideal of R that is not,



                                                                                                                                                                    nilpotent.


                                                                          EXERCISES                                                                          12.    Let R be a ring without identity. Embed R in a ring S with identity which has
                                                                                                                                                                    characteristic zero, as in Theorem III.l .10. Prove that J(R) = J(S). Consequently
       Afo/e:        R is always a ring.                                                                                                                            every semisimple ring may be embedded in a semisimple ring with identity.

 1 .    For each a,b e R let a ° b — a + b + ab.                                                                                                             13.    J(MdA n R) = Msit n J(R). Here is an outline of a proof:
          (a) © is an associative binary operation with identity element         e R.
                                                                                                                                                                         (a) If   A is a left jR-module, consider the elements of^ n =                                         A® A® •© A-   •




          (b) The set G of all elements of R that are both left and right quasi-regular                                                                             (n   summands) as column vectors; then A n is a left (Mat n ^)-module (under
        forms a group under o.                                                                                                                                      ordinary matrix multiplication).
          (c) If R has an identity, then a e R is left [resp. right] quasi-regular if and only                                                                           (b) If A is a simple /^-module, A n is a simple (Mat n /?)-module.
            + a is left [resp. right] invertible. [///>2/: (U + r)(U + a) =
        if \ R                                                                                                                        \   R   +r°a                         J(Mat n R) d Mat n J(R).
                                                                                                                                                                         (c)
        and    + - Ir = (r - R ° a]
                   /-(It?           fl)                               \   )                                                                                              (d)Mat n J(R) d J(Mat n R). [Hint: prove that Mat n J(R) is a left quasi-regular
                                                                                                                                                                    ideal of Mat n R as follows. For each k = 1,2,       n let Kk consist of all matrices
       (Kaplansky) R is a division ring if and only if every element of R except one is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .   .   ,
 2.
                                                                                                                                                                    (aij) such that a {j e J(R) and a {j = if j ^ k. Show that Kk is a left quasi-regular
       left quasi-regular. [Note that the only element in a division ring D that is not left
                                                                                                                                                                    left ideal of Mat n # and observe that Ki + K2 -\        h Kn = Mdit n J(R).]
       quasi-regular is — lz>; also see Exercise 1.]

                                                                                                                                                             14. (a)       Let / be a nonzero ideal of R[x] and p(x) a nonzero polynomial of least
 3.    Let / be a left ideal of R and let (/ R) = {reR\rR          I}.        :                               d
                                                                                                                                                                    degree in / with leading coefficient                         a.   If f(x) e R[x]               and a mf(x) = 0, then
         (a) (/ R) is an ideal of R. If / is regular, then (/ R) is the largest ideal of R
                            :                                                                            :

                                                                                                                                                                    a"~ p(x)f(x) = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                          l

       that is contained in /.
                                                                                                                                                                    (b) If a ring       has no nonzero nil ideals (in particular, if R is semisimple), then
           (b) If / is a regular maximal left ideal of R and A                                         ^ R/I, then a(A) = (I R).                   :

                                                                                                                                                                    R[x] is semisimple. [Hint: Let                         M be the    set       of nonzero polynomials of least
       Therefore J(R) =                     fl (/         :       tf), where / runs over all the regular                maximal left ideals
                                                                                                                                                                    degree in J(R[x]). Let TV be the set consisting of   and the leading coefficients of
        of R.
                                                                                                                                                                    polynomials in M. Use (a) to show that TV is a nil ideal of R, whence J(R[x]) = 0.]
                                                                                                                                                                    (c) There exist rings R such that R[x] is semisimple, but R is not. [Hint, consider
 4.    The radical J(R) contains no nonzero idempotents. However, a nonzero idem-
       potent may be left quasi-regular. [Hint: Exercises 1 and 2].                                                                                                 R = F[[x]], with F a field.]
 434                                       CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                           3.       SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                                                                435


    15.           Let L be a left ideal and K a right ideal of R. Let M(R) be the ideal generated by                                    EXAMPLE. Let P be the set of prime integers. For each k e Z and p £ P let
                  all nilpotent ideals of R.                                                                                        k p eZp be the image of k under the canonical epimorphism Z — >Z„. Then the map
                      (a)     L + LR is an ideal such that (L + LR) n C L n + £ w /* for all « > 1.                                 <t>
                                                                                                                                         Z —> :               Wz
                                                                                                                                                   v given by k |— \k p pt p is a monomorphism of rings such that     }


                      (b)     #+           is       an ideal such that (K +                  C Jfn +            for all n >   1.
                                                                                                                                              0(Z) = Zp for every p e P. Therefore Z is isomorphic to a subdirect product of the
                                is nilpotent, so is the ideal L + LR [resp. K + RK], whence
                                                                                                                                   7T P
                   If L [resp.
                      (c)

              L C M(R) [resp. K C M(R)].                                                                                            family of fields \ZV                          \       p eP}. More generally we have:
                      (d) If   maximal nilpotent ideal of R, then i?/Nhas no nonzero nilpotent
                                   is a

              left or right ideals. [Hint: first show that R/N has no nonzero nilpotent ideals;

              then apply (c) to the ring R/N.]
                                                                                                                                    Proposition 3.2.                         A nonzero ring R is semisimple if and only ifR is isomorphic to a
                                                                                                                                   subdirect product ofprimitive rings.
                 (e) If K [resp. L] is nil, but not nilpotent and t  R —* jR/N is the canonical
                                                                                              :



              epimorphism, then7r(#) [resp. 7r(L)] is a nil right [resp. left] ideal of R/N which is
                  not nilpotent.                                                                                                                  REMARK. Propositions 1.7 and 3.2 imply that a nonzero commutative semi-
                                                                                                                                   simple ring is a subdirect product of fields.
 16. (Levitsky) Every nil left or right ideal / in a left Noetherian ring                                 R is nilpotent.
              [Sketch ofProof.                 It suffices by Exercise 15 to assume that           R has no nonzero nil-                          SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.2. Suppose R is nonzero semisimple and let (P be
              potent left or right ideals. Suppose / is a left or a right ideal which is not nilpo-                                the set of all left primitive ideals of R. Then for each P s (P, R/P is a primitive ring
              tent and O^flc/. Show that aR is a nil right ideal (even though / may be a left                                      (Definition 2.1). By Theorem 2.3 (iii),                                                        = J(R) = f| P> For each P let \ P R -* R/P                           :



          ideal), whence the left ideal (l(u) is nonzero for all ueaR. There exists a nonzero                                                                                                                                                       Pe(P

              u Q e aR with &(u ) maximal, whence &(uo) = Q(uqx) for all x e R such that Uqx 5* 0.
                                                                                                                                   and 7rp               :
                                                                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                                                                              Qe(P
                                                                                                                                                                            — R/P be the respective canonical epimorphisms. The map
                                                                                                                                                                                  >



              Show that (u y)u Q =                       for ally e R, so that (Ru Q)   2
                                                                                            = 0. Therefore Ru Q = 0, which                                                                                                                  = {r + ^Ipecp is a monomorphism of
                                                                                                                                   <t>    :       R-+YL R/P given by r|->                                   {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ap(/-)Jp e(p
          implies that {r e R                   |
                                                    Rr = Oj is a nonzero nilpotent right ideal of i?; contradiction.]                                    Ps(P
                                                                                                                                                         = R/P for every P e (P.
                                                                                                                                   rings such that T P <f>(R)
17.           Show that Nakayama's Lemma VIII.4.5 is valid for any ring R with identity,                                              Conversely suppose there is a family of primitive rings {Ri / £ /} and a mono-                                                        |




              provided condition (i) is replaced by the condition                                                                  morphism of rings   R -> YL R sucn tnat *k<KR) = Rk for each k e I. Let \pk be the
                                                                                                                                                                                      :                     <
                                                                                                                                                                            <t>

                                                                                                                                                                                                  ui
                                        (i')   J is contained in the Jacobson radical of R.                                        epimorphism T k Then jR/Ker \p k is isomorphic to the primitive ring R k (Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                     <f>.


                                                                                                                                   III.2.10), whence Ker \p k is a left primitive ideal of R (Definition 2.1). Therefore
              [Hint: Use Theorem 2.3(iv) and Exercise 1 (c) to show (i') => (ii).]
                                                                                                                                   J(R)            C
                                                                                                                                            p| Ker yp k by Theorem 2.3 (iii). However, if r £ R and \pk (r) = 0, then the A:th

                                                                                                                                   component of <t>(r) in YL R                                i   is   zero. Thus if r e                                    Ker \p k we must have <£(r) = 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kel

3.        SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                                                                                         Since                 is    a monomorphism r = 0. Therefore J(R)                                                             C f) Ker   yp k      = 0, whence R is
          In accordance with the theory of radicals outlined in the first part of Section 2 we                                     semisimple.
now restrict our study to rings that are Jacobson semisimple. Arbitrary semisimple
rings are characterized as particular kinds of subrings of direct products of primitive
                                                                                                                                      In view of the results on primitive rings in Section 1, we can now characterize
rings (Proposition 3.2).  Much stronger results are proved for semisimple (left)                                                   semisimple rings as those rings that are isomorphic to subdirect products of families
Artinian rings. Such rings are actually finite direct products of simple rings (Theorem                                            of rings, each of which is a dense ring of endomorphisms of a vector space over a
                                                                                                                                   division ring. Unfortunately subdirect products (and dense rings of endomorphisms)
3.3). They may also be characterized in numerous ways in terms of modules (Theo-
rem 3.7). Along the way semisimple modules over arbitrary rings are defined and                                                    are not always the most tractable objects with which to deal. But in the absence of

their basic properties developed (Theorem 3.6).                                                                                    further restrictions this is probably the best one can do. In the case of (left) Artinian
                                                                                                                                   rings, however, these results can be considerably sharpened.



Definition 3.1.                        A ring R is said to be a subdirect product of the family of rings
                                                                                                                                   Theorem                      3.3. (Wedderburn-Artiri).                                     The following conditions on a ring                                           R are
{   Ri        I
                  i   s I }   ifR is a subring of the direct product YL^ sucn tnat 7r k(R) = Rk for every                          equivalent.
k e I, where ir k                  :
                                       YL Ri ~ Rk is the canonical epimorphism.
                                                     >
                                                                                                                                                   (i)   R is a nonzero semisimple left Artinian ring;
                                                                                                                                                  (ii)   R is a direct product of a finite number of simple ideals each of which is iso-
          REMARK. A ring S is isomorphic to a subdirect product of the family of rings                                             morphic to the endomorphism ring of a finite dimensional vector space over a division

j   Ri:           / £   /( if and only if there is             a monomorphism of rings              :   S — YL Ri such that
                                                                                                           >
                                                                                                                                   ring;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D and positive integers n u
          I




                                                                                                               i&i                            (iii)      there exist division rings Di,                           .       .   .   ,     t                                             .   .   .   ,   n t such that
ir k <i)(S)             = Rk for every k e I.                                                                                      R is isomorphic to the ring Mat Di X Mat n2T> X                     ni                                     2    X Mat nt D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t.
436                                     CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.   SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                                                              437



      REMARK. By a simple ideal of P we mean an ideal that is itself a simple ring.                                                                                                                     REMARK. Somewhat more is actually true: any left Artinian ring with identity
                                                                                                                                                                                               is left               Noetherian (Exercise 13).
      PROOF OF 3.3. (ii) <=> (iii) Exercise III.2.9 and Theorem VII. 1.4.
                                                      t



      (ii)    => (i) By hypothesis R              = JJ Ri with each R the endomorphism ring of a
                                                                                           {
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.4. (i) Theorem 3.3. (ii) Theorem 3.3 is valid
                                                  i=l                                                                                                                                          with "left" replaced by "right" throughout. Consequently the equivalence of condi-
vector space.             The        example after Definition 1.5 shows that each Ri                                                             is    primitive,                              tions (i) and (iii) of Theorem 3.3 implies that P is left Artinian if and only if P is
whence J(Ri) =                      by Theorem 2.10 (i). Consequently by Theorem 2.17                                                                                                          right Artinian.

                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (iii)         Corollaries VIII.1.7 and VIII.1.12 and Theorem 3.3 (iii).
                                                  /(/*) = II -WW = 0.
                                                               i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                                        The following corollary is not needed in the sequel. Recall that an element e of a
                                                                                                                                                                                               ring P is said to be idempotent if e 2 =
Therefore R is semisimple. R is left Artinian by Theorem VII. 1.4 and Corollaries                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e.


VIII.1.7 and VIII.1.12.
      (i) ==> (ii)    Since R            ^    and J(R) = 0, R has left primitive ideals by Theorem 2.3
     Suppose that R has only finitely many distinct left primitive ideals: Pi, P 2
(iii).                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                               Corollary 3.5. If I is an ideal in a semisimple left Artinian ring R, then I = Re, where
                                                                                                                                                           ,       .       .        ,    t .
                                                                                                                                                                               .




Then each R/Pi is a primitive ring (Definition 2.1) that, is left Artinian (Corollary
                                                                                                                                                                                               e is an idempotent which is in the center o/R.
VIII. 1.6). Consequently, by Theorem 1.14 each P/P is a simple ring isomorphic to      t


an endomorphism ring of a finite dimensional left vector space over a division ring.
Since R/Pi is simple, each P» is a maximal ideal of R (Theorem III.2.13). Furthermore                                                                                                                SKETCH OF PROOF. By Theorem 3.3 P is a (ring) direct product of simple
R2     Pi (otherwise (R/Pi) = 0), whence R + Pi = R by maximality. Likewise if
                            2                 2                                                                                                                                                ideals, P = h X  X In For each j, I fl / is either or / by simplicity. After re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;                               ;



/ ^ j, then Pi + Pj = R by maximality. Consequently by Corollary III. 2. 27 (of                                                                                                                indexing                  if    necessary                 we may assume that / fl / = /                                      ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for j = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t and                         .   .   .   ,



the Chinese Remainder Theorem) and Theorem 2.3 (iii) there is an isomorphism                                                                                                                   /   fl    I   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -   =        fory =         /       +       1,       .       •   -   ,   n. Since     P has an identity by Corollary 3.4, there exist
of rings:                                                                                                                                                                                      ej s Ij such                   that \ R       = e + e     x                        2 -\           \-   en Since /,/* =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                for j ^ k we have


                          R = P/0 = R/J(R) = R/f) Pi ^ P/P X
                                                                     t


                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                   •       •
                                                                                                                               X R/P   t.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ei   +e +        2        •   •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           + en =               \R    = (l*) =      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +e +2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2           •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                + en \
                                                                 i   =i
                                                                                                                                                                                               whence ej 2 = ej for each j. It is easy to verify that each e lies in the center of P and                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -




                              t

                                                                                                                                                                                               that e = ei + e 2 +     + e is an idempotent in / which is in the center of P. Since /
If L k : R/P/c       — II R/P< is the canonical monomorphism (Theorem III.2.22), then
                      >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t




                          i   =\                          t,                                                                                 t                                                 is an ideal, Re <Z /. Conversely if u s /, then u — u\r = ue +            + «^n- But for                                                             x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •   •   •




each L k (R/Pk ) is a simple ideal of                H
                                                     i=i
                                                               R/Pi- Under the isomorphism                                                  U R/Pi ^
                                                                                                                                            i=i
                                                                                                                                                                                        P,     j > /, uej s / fl Ij = 0. Thus u = uei +           + ue — ue. Therefore / <Z Re.                                 •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t




the images of the i k (R/Pk ) are simple ideals of P. Clearly P is the (internal) direct
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Theorem 3.3 is a characterization of semisimple left Artinian rings in ring
product of these ideals.
                                                                                                                                                                                               theoretic terms. As one might suspect from the close interrelationship of rings and
   To complete the proof we need only show that P cannot have an infinite number
                                                                                                                                                                                               modules, such rings can also be characterized strictly in terms of modules. In order
of distinct left primitive ideals. Suppose, on the contrary, that Pi, P 2                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                            P    3,   ... is a se-
                                                                                                                                                                                               to obtain these characterizations we need a theorem that is valid for modules over an
quence of distinct left primitive ideals of P. Since
                                                                                                                                                                                               arbitrary ring.

                                         Pi   3 Pi n p 3 Pi n p n p 3
                                                           2                      2            3
                                                                                                               •       •
                                                                                                                           •




is   a descending chain of (left) ideals there is an integer n such that Pi                                                                       fl   •       •       •       fl       Pn
= Pi fl          •   PI   P„ PI Pn+U whence Pi fl                •   •
                                                                             fl   P„ CI Pn+i The previous paragraph
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                               Theorem 3.6. The following conditions on a nonzero module A over a ring R are
shows that P 2 + P = P and Pi + Pj = R Q 9* j) for ij = 1,2, ...,/! + 1. The
                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                               equivalent.

proof of Theorem III.2.25 shows that Pn+ + (Pi fl            fl Pn ) = P. Consequently
                                                                                                                                                                                                         A is the sum of a family of simple submodules.
                                                                                               •       •   •
                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (i)
Pn +i = P, which contradicts the fact that Pn+i is left primitive (see the Remark after                                                                                                                  A is the (internal) direct sum of a family of simple submodules.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (ii)
Definition 2.1). Therefore P has only finitely many distinct primitive ideals and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (iii) For every nonzero element ao/A, Ra ^ 0; and every submodule B ofA is a
proof is complete.                                                                                                                                                                             direct summand (that is, A = B         C for some submodule C).

                                                                                                                                                                                                    A module that satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.6 is said to be
Corollary 3.4.                (i)   A semisimple left Artinian ring has an identity.                                                                                                           semisimple or completely reducible. The terminology semisimple is motivated by

      (ii)    A semisimple ring is left Artinian if and only if it is right Artinian.                                                                                                          Theorem 3.3 (ii) and the fact (to be proved below) that every module over a (left)
      (iii)   A semisimple left Artinian ring is both left and right Noetherian.                                                                                                               Artinian semisimple ring is semisimple.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8




438                                 CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                   3.         SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                                                                                      439


         SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.6. (i) => (ii) Suppose A is the sum of the family                                                                           /^-module) are precisely the left ideals of R, some of these characterizations are
{Bi      |
             / e   /(   of simple submodules (that is, A is generated by                            U    Bi). Use Zorn's               Lemma              stated in terms of left ideals.               A subset                j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eu           .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     em \ of               R is a set of orthogonal idem-
                                                                                                                                                          potents if e? =              d for all and/               =               for all / 5^ j.
to show that there is a nonempty subset J of / which is maximal with respect to the
property: the submodule generated by {Bj \jeJ]                                        is in fact        a direct sum          ^           Bj.   We
claim that A =                  ^   Bj. To prove this we need only show that                                 B C
                                                                                                               {             B f° r everv
                                                                                                                              i                           Theorem 3.7. The following conditions on a nonzero ring R with identity are equiv-
                                                                                                                                                          alent.
i   e /. Since          B is simple and B
                         {                            {   fl£ ) is a submodule of B either £ fl
                                                                     3                                  i9               t                    5,-) =

£  which implies Bi
    t,
                                    C^           Bj, or ft fl       Bj) = 0. The second case cannot occur.                                                              (i)     R is semisimple left Artinian;
For if it did, K = {/( U J would be a set such that the submodule generated by                                                                                      (ii)        every unitary left ^-module is projective;
                                                                                                                                                                    (iii)       every unitary left R-module is injective;
{ft k s K) is a direct sum (Theorem IV.l .1 5), which contradicts the maximality of J.
         |




   (ii) => (Hi) Suppose A is the direct sum                                  ^
                                               ft with each ft a simple submodule. If
                                                                             tel
                                                                                                                                                                    (iv)        every short exact sequence of unitary left R-modules is split exact;
                                                                                                                                                                     (v) every nonzero unitary left K-module is semisimple;
a is a nonzero element of A, then a = bix H     h 6 with    5^ 6 £ ft*          /* £ /).
                                                                                      tjfc                   ljfc             .   .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                                                    (vi)        R is itself a unitary semisimple left R-module;
Clearly /to =    if and only if Rbik =  for each /*. But Remark (iii) after Definition                                                                           (vii)          every left ideal ofR is of the form Re with e idempotent;
1.1      shows that Rbik = ft^ ^ 0. Therefore /to ^ 0.                                                                                                          (viii)          R is the {internal) direct sum (as a left R-module) of minimal left ideals
         Let B be a nonzero submodule of A. By simplicity B fl ft is either                                                           or ft. If
                                                                                                                                                          Ki,   .  K m such that K* = Re* fe £ R) for = 1,2,
                                                                                                                                                                    .   .
                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                     m and d,                       i                         .   .       .   ,              {   .   .   .       e m } is a set
£ fl ft= ft for all                 z,   then A = B and B is trivially a direct summand, A                                        =500.                   of orthogonal idempotent s with d + e +     + e m = 1r.       2            •       •       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,




Otherwise 5 fl ft =                       for some /. Use Zorn's Lemma to find a subset J of / which is
maximal                 with     respect         to       the   property:          B fl           Bj)    = 0. We             claim              that
                                                                                                                                                                REMARKS. Since a semisimple ring is left Artinian if and only if it is right
^ = ^              © (H        Bj). It suffices by Theorem IV. 1.1 5 to show that ft                                :
                                                                                                                        C B © (X,                         Artinian (Corollary 3.4), each condition in Theorem 3.7 is equivalent to its obvious
                                                                                                                                                          analogue for right modules or right ideals. There is no loss of generality in assuming
for each /. If / eJ, then ft (=                           ^         and we are done          -
                                                                                                 If ' k J and
                                                                                                    '

                                                                                                                    ^ ^5 ©                       5   >>   R has an identity, since every semisimple left Artinian ring necessarily has one by
                                                                                                                                                          Corollary 3.4. The theorem is false if the word "unitary" is omitted (Exercise 10).
then ft            fl   (5   © ^ Bd =                     by the simplicity of ft. It follows that 7 U                        {/} is a set


that contradicts the maximality of /. Therefore                                     5,-C502^                                                                    SKETCH OF PROOF OF 3.7. (ii) <=> (iii) <=> (iv) is Exercise IV.3.1. To com-
                                                                                                                                                          plete the proof we shall prove the implications (iv)                                                                             (v) and (v) => (vii) =--» (vi) =>
             We first observe that if Wis any submodule of A, then every submodule
         (iii) => (i)
                                                                                                                                                          (i) => (viii) => (v).
K of N is a direct summand of N. For by hypothesis K is a direct summand of A,
                                           (N f) K)@(N fl L) = K@(N fl L).                                                                                      (iv) => (v) If         B is a submodule of a nonzero unitary /^-module A, then
say^ = #©L. Verify that N = N C\ A
   Next we show that /I has simple submodules. Since A 5* 0, there exists a nonzero                                                                                                                     0->B^>A-> A/B ->
element a of A. Use Zorn's Lemma to find a submodule B of A that is maximal with
respect to the property that a \B. By hypothesis A — B  C for some nonzero sub-                   ©                                                                                             by hypothesis. The proof of Theorem IV. 1.1
                                                                                                                                                          is a short exact sequence, which splits

module C and #C ^ 0. We claim that C is simple. If it were not, then C would have                                                                         shows that A = B                 © C with C ^ A/B. Since A
                                                                                                                                                                                                           is unitary, Ra 9^  for every non-

a proper submodule D, which would be a direct summand of C by the previous para-                                                                          zero a £ A. Therefore A is semisimple by Theorem 3.6.
graph. Consequently C =                          D®E
                                with £ ^ 0, whence                 =                             A=B@C B©D®E,                                                             0-^A^B-^C—>0bea short exact sequence of unitary ^-mod-
                                                                                                                                                                (v) => (iv) Let
with Z) ^   and E ^ 0. Now                        B®
                                D and 5 £ both contain B properly. Therefore                                                                              ules. Thenf  A —> f(A) is an isomorphism. Since B is semisimple by (v), f(A) is a
                                                                                                                                                                                   :



by the maximality of B we must have azB® D and a s 5           £. Thus b + d = a                   ©                                                      direct summand of B by Theorem 3.6. If t B — f(A) is the canonical epimorphism,:                       >

= b' + e(b,b' zB;dzD;eeE). Now = a - a = (A - 6') + </ - es£©Z)©£                                                                                         then7r/= /and/~V :B—>A is an /^-module homomorphism such that (/_1 7r)/= 1 a                                                                                                     .




implies that </ = 0, e = 0, and b - b' = 0. Consequently, a = beB which is a con-                                                                         Therefore the sequence splits by Theorem IV.1.18.
tradiction. Therefore                    C is simple.                                                                                                           (v) => (vii) The left ideals of              R are precisely its submodules. If L is a left ideal,
         Let       A be the submodule of A generated by                            all the simple submodules of A.                            Then        then R = L                   / for some left ideal / by (v) and Theorem 3.6. Consequently, there
A = A              ©N
             for some submodule N.                                       N
                                         satisfies the same hypotheses as A by the                                                                        are  d e L and e zl such that \ R = e + e Since e £ L, Re CL. If r £ L, then
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                    x                        2.                            x                  x


paragraph before last. If                        N
                            ^ 0, then the argument in the immediately preceding                                                                           r = rei + re whence re = r — rei z L fl / = 0. Thus r = rei for every r e L; in
                                                                                                                                                                                  2,            2

paragraph shows that                     N
                        contains a nonzero simple submodule T. Since Tis a simple                                                                         particular, dd = d and L (Z Re Therefore, L = Rd with e idempotent.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y .                                                                                  y


submodule of A, T (= A Thus T        A H     .                  C             N
                                              = 0, which is a contradiction. There-                                                                           (vii) => (vi) A submodule L of R is a left ideal, whence L = Re with e idempotent.

fore         N
       = 0, whence A = A is the sum of a family of sfmple submodules.                                                                                     Verify that R(1 R - e) is a left ideal of R such that R = Re® R{\ R - e). Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                          R is semisimple by Theorem 3.6.
                                                                                                                                                              (vi) => (i) By hypothesis R is a direct sum      B with each Bi a simple submodule                      {,
         We are now able to give numerous characterizations of semisimple left Artinian
rings in terms of modules. Since the submodules of a ring R (considered as a                                                                    left      (left ideal) of R. Consequently there is a finite subset 7                                                                       of / (whose elements will be
                                                                                                                                                            »




440                                                        CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3.           SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                                                        441



labeled 1,2,                                              for convenience) such that 1^ = e\                                                                             +e +  2          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                      + e (e s Bi). Thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                              k       {                                      PROOF OF 3.8. (i) is true by Theorem 3.3. (ii) If / is a simple ideal of ft then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RJ ?± 0, whence IkJ ^                                     for some k. Since Ik J is a nonzero ideal that is contained in
for every r e R 9 r = rei                                                      + re H            2                            h re*                              whence                       = $^ ft. If reJ(R),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         both Ik and /, the simplicity of Ik and / implies Ik = hJ = J. (iii) The ideals A, In
                                                                                  t = l                                                                                                               i = i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .   .       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .




then /ft =                                        for all / by Theorem 2.3 (i). Consequently,                                                                                                                                                            [resp. /i,  . yJm are nonzero and mutually disjoint by hypothesis. Define a map 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .   .           ]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         from the m element set {Ju         ,Jm to the n element set {h,       In by Jk f-> Ikf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   .    .               )                                           .   .       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,   )

                                                                       r       = rl R = rei -{- re                                            2
                                                                                                                                                  -\
                                                                                                                                                                h re k = 0.                                                                              where Jk = Ik 6 is well defined and injective by (ii), whence m < n. The same argu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




Therefore, /(/?) =                                                 and R is semisimple. Since ft is simple and                                                                                                                                           ment with the roles of Jk and Ik reversed shows that n < m. Therefore n = m and 6 is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a bijection.
                                                                   (ft         ©•            •
                                                                                                     -©ft)/(ft ©•                                      •
                                                                                                                                                           -©ft-i)            ^ A,
the series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A semisimple left Artinian ring R is a direct sum of minimal left ideals by Theo-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rem 3.7 (viii). The uniqueness (up to isomorphism) of this decomposition will be an
                               * = ft ©• -©ft 3 A ©• -©ft_i 3
                                                           •                                                                  -                                  •   •
                                                                                                                                                                         3 ft ©ft 3 ft ZD                                                                immediate consequence of the following proposition. For R is a semisimple i?-mod-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ule (Theorem 3.7 (vi)) and the minimal left ideals of R are precisely its simple
is   a composition series for                                                                        Therefore, R is left Artinian by Theorem VIII.1.11.                                                                                                 submodules.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t



         (i) =» (viii)                             In view of Theorem 3.3 it suffices to assume that R =                                                                                                              JJ Mat ni A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t   =t
with each n { >   and each                                                      A
                              a division ring. For each fixed / and each j = 1 ,2, ... m                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Proposition 3.9. Let A be a semisimple module over a ring R. // there are direct sum
let eij be the matrix in Mat n «£i with \ Di in position        and    elsewhere. Then                                                                                                                                                                   decompositions
{eiU       .       .       .
                                   ,
                                       eini   \    is a set of orthogonal idempotents in                                                                         Mat ni A = ft whose sum is the
identity matrix. The proof of Corollary VIII. 1.1 2 shows that each fte\                                                                                  is a minimal                                            ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A = B!0..-0B m                                                  and    A = d©-.-©C n                           ,




left      ideal of Ri                               and Ri = fte»i©-                                                      -©ft^n,- Since R is the ring direct product                                                                                    where each Bi,                  Q             a simple submodule of A, then                                            m = n and (after reindexing)

                                                                                                      it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              is
ft X                   •
                                       X ft, it follows that ftft =                                                                       for /            ^ j; that /te = ft^,; that Re
                                                                                                                                                                                   -

                                                                                                                                                                                   t y                                                     {j   is   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bi^Q/ori = 1,2,                           .   .   .   ,   m.
minimal left ideal of ft and that                                                                                         |       1       <       /    < /; 1 < j < n               { \       is a set of orthogonal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t           m
                                                                                                                                                                     =             ^l ear"ly ^ =                                                            REMARK. The uniqueness statement here is weaker than the one in Proposi-
idempotents in R whose sum is                                                                                     (Yl ea) =                                                                                                               XI
                                       i=1   j       i'=l                                                                                                                                                             i=1;=1                             tion 3.8. Proposition 3.9 is false if "ft-                                                         ^ C<"   is replaced         by          = C," (Exercise 11).
         (viii) =» (v) Let A be a unitary /^-module. For each a s A and each /,                                                                                                                                       K{ a is a sub-
module of A (Exercise IV.1.3) and! a = \rci = e^a +  + em a s A^a -f + #m tf.                                                                                             •                                               •       •   •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROOF OF 3.9. The series
Consequently the submodules K a (az A, 1 < i < m) generate A. For each as A                               {


and each /, the map / K — > K a given by k h ka is an /^-module epimorphism.
                                                                           :        {                 {


Since              K is a minimal left ideal of a ring with identity, K is a simple /^-module. Con-
                               {                                                                                                                                          {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A with simple factors B U B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         is a composition series for                             Bm (see p. 375). Similarly                                2)   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f

sequently                              Kid ?± 0, then / is an isomorphism by Schur's Lemma 1.10. Thus
                                        if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A = Ci 0-       Cn 3 C 0- -0 Cm ZD           ZD Cm ZD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is a composition series for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2

(
    Ka
     {         |
                       1           < / < m; a e A A^a ^     is a family of simple submodules whose sum is A.
                                                                           ;                              j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A with simple factors Cu       Cn The Jordan-Holder Theorem VIII. 1.10 implies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .   .   .                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,

Therefore A is semisimple by Theorem 3.6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                that m = n and (after reindexing) B ^ C for     = 1,2,    m.                               x                /              .   .   .   ,




         Theorems 3.3 and 3.7 show that a semisimple left Artinian ring may be decom-                                                                                                                                                                       The following theorem will be used only in the proof of Theorem 6.7.
posed as a direct product [resp. sum] of simple ideals [resp. minimal left ideals]. We
turn now to the question of the uniqueness of these decompositions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Theorem 3.10. Let R be a semisimple left Artinian ring.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (i)   Every simple left [resp. right] R-module is isomorphic to a minimal left [resp.
Proposition 3.8. Let R be a semisimple left Artinian ring.                                                                                                                                                                                               right] ideal ofR.

          (i)                      R = Ii X           •
                                                                   X I         ri   where each \                                          is a simple ideal                   ofR.                                                                          (ii)   The number of nonisomorphic simple left [resp. right] R-modules is the same as
                                                                                                                                      }


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the number of simple components ofR.
         (ii)                  IfJ is any simple ideal ofR, then J = Ik for some k.
         (iii)                 IfR = Ji x                      •   •   •
                                                                           X J m with each J k a simple ideal ofR, then n = m and (after
reindexing) Ik = Jk for k                                                       =        1   ,2,      .       .   .   ,       n.                                                                                                                            PROOF. R is right Artinian by Corollary 3.4. Since the preceding results are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         left-right symmetric, it suffices to prove the theorem for left modules.

         REMARKS. The conclusion J = Ij [resp. Jk = h] is considerably stronger than                                                                                                                                                                               By Theorem 3.7, R = A 0---©^ with each K a nonzero minimal left
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (i)                                                                            1                                                   {

the statement "/ [resp. Jk ]                                                            is       isomorphic to                                                  The uniquely determined simple                                                           ideal (simple submodule) of R. R has an identity (Corollary 3.4) and every simple
ideals Iu ...,/„ in Proposition 3.8 are called the simple components of R.                                                                                                                                                                               /^-module A is unitary by Remark (ii) after Definition 1.1. The proof of (viii) => (v)
442                                                      CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                                                  3.   SEMISIMPLE RINGS                                      443



of Theorem 3.7 shows that for some / (1                                                        < i < m) and a e A, A contains a nonzero                                                                                           (a)   Every division ring is regular.
submodule foa such that foa                                                   =       fo. The simplicity of A implies that A — foa   fo.                                                                 =                    (b)       A finite direct product of regular rings is regular.
       (ii)       The simple components of R are the unique simple ideals                                                                                                        of R such that                               (c)       Every regular ring is semisimple. [The converse is false (for example, Z).]
R = Ii X               -   •    -
                                    X In (Proposition 3.8). In view of (i) it suffices to prove:                                                                                                                              (d)       The ring of all linear transformations on a vector space (not necessarily
       (a)        each fo is contained in some I                                                 t ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            finite dimensional) over a division ring is regular.

       (b)        each I contains some fo;
                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (e)       A semisimple left Artinian ring is regular.
       (c)        fo   = Kj as /^-modules                                         if       and only if fo and Kj are contained in the same                                                                                    (f)       R is regular if and only if every principal left [resp. right] ideal of R is
simple component I                                       t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            generated by an idempotent element.
These statements are proved as follows.                                                                                                                                                                                       (g)       A nonzero regular ring R with identity is a division ring if and only if its
    (a) Since R has an identity, fo = Rfo = hfo X       X Info. Since each I fo is a                                                           •    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            only idempotents are          and 1^.
left ideal of R contained in fo, we must have I fo = K{ for some / and Ijfo =    for                                     t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Every nonzero homomorphic image and every nonzero submodule of a
j'5*    t   by minimality. Therefore fo = I fo                                                    t            CI       t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6.     (a)

       (b) If I t contains no fo, then                                                     R =   ^         fo is              contained in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            semisimple module is semisimple.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (b) The intersection of two semisimple submodules is                   or semisimple.
                                                                   I\   X     '   '    '
                                                                                           X It—l X It+1 X                             m
                                                                                                                                           '   '
                                                                                                                                                   X In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7.     The following conditions on a semisimple module A are equivalent:
by (a). Since I                         t       ^        by simplicity and R = IJ/y,                                                                                                                                          (a) A is finitely generated.
                               5* /,            = /, PI R = I fl (/i X                                 •   •   •
                                                                                                                       X It-i X It+i X                          •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                            X /„) = 0,                                        (b) A is a direct sum of a finite number of simple submodules.
                                                                              t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (c) A has a composition series (see p. 375).
which is a contradiction.                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) A satisfies both the ascending and descending chain conditions on sub-
       (c)        If fo             CI              tl   and Kj CI It2 with h ^ / 2                                           ,        then by           (a),  5* fo = I Kt and                 tl                          modules (see Theorem VIII. 1.11).
  ^ AT, = / # r
                           t2           ?
                                            .   Since          R = IJ/y,                               =               = I I      t2   tl .        Consequently, there can be no
jR-module isomorphism fo                                                =
                              Kh Conversely suppose fo CZ I and Kj I Then fo                                                                                        t                d    t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8.     Let A be a module over a left Artinian ring R such that Ra 9^                  for all nonzero

and Kj are /r modules. Since I is simple and    9^ fo = I fo by (a), the left anni-
                                                                                  t                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a e A and let J = J(R). Then JA =              if and   only if A is semisimple. [Hints: if
hilator ideal of fo in I must be zero. Consequently, Kjfo 5*   t since    ^                                                                                                                     ^C                          JA = 0, then A is an jR/7-module, with R/J semisimple left Artinian;                       see

Thus for some a e AT Kja 5* 0. Since    and K are left ideals of R, K a is a nonzero
                                                         t ,                                                             }                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Exercise IV. 1.1 7.]

left ideal of R and Kja                                        d
                          A^ Therefore K a = fo by minimality. The proof (viii)
                                                                        t .                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Let R be a ring that (as a left /^-module) is the sum of its minimal left ideals.
(v) of Theorem 3.7 shows that Kja     Kj, whence fo     Kj.                                 =                                                      =                                                                 9.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Assume that    r £ R Rr = 0) = 0. If A is an jR-module such that RA = A, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               {     \




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A is semisimple. [Hint: if /is a minimal left ideal and as A, show that la is either
                                                                                           EXERCISES                                                                                                                        zero or a simple submodule of A.]

 1 .    A ring R is isomorphic to a subdirect product of the family of rings                                                                                                         {
                                                                                                                                                                                         Ri     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                     /   e /) if    10.     Show that a nonzero /^-module A such that RA =                 is   not semisimple, but may
       and only if there exists for each / e / an ideal fo of R such that R/fo                                                                                                            ^ R and        {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            be projective. Consequently Theorem 3.7 may be false if the word "unitary" is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            omitted. [See Exercise IV.2.2, Theorem IV.3.2 and Proposition IV.3.5.]

 2.    A ring                       is subdirectly irreducible if the intersection of all nonzero ideals of                                                                                                  R is   1 1 .   Let R be the ring of 2 X 2 matrices over an infinite field.
        nonzero.                                                                                                                                                                                                              (a)       R has an infinite number of distinct proper left ideals, any two of which
              R is subdirectly irreducible if and only if whenever R is isomorphic to a
              (a)                                                                                                                                                                                                           are isomorphic as left jR-modules.
        subdirect product of {R \i e /}, R = R for some e / [see Exercise 1].
                                                                          t                                        t
                                                                                                                                                        /                                                                     (b)       There are infinitely many distinct pairs (B,C) such that B and C are mini-
              (b) (BirkhofT) Every ring is isomorphic to a subdirect product of a family of                                                                                                                                 mal left ideals of R and R = B          © C.
        subdirectly irreducible rings.
              (c)      The zero divisors in a commutative subdirectly irreducible ring (together                                                                                                                    12.     A left Artinian ring R has the same number of nonisomorphic simple left jR-mod-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ules as nonisomorphic simple right /^-modules. [Hint: Show that A is a simple
       with 0) form an ideal.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            jR-module if and only if A is a simple R/J(R)-mod\i\z', use Theorem 2.14 and
 3.     A commutative semisimple left Artinian ring is a direct product of fields.                                                                                                                                          Theorem 3.10.]
 4.    Determine up to isomorphism all semisimple rings of order 1008. How many of                                                                                                                                  13. (a)        (Hopkins) If R is a left Artinian ring with identity, then R is left Noetherian.
       them are commutative? [Hint: Exercise V.8.10.]                                                                                                                                                                       [Hints: Let n be the least positive integer such that J n =              (Proposition 2.13).
 5.    An element a of a ring R is regular (in the sense of Von Neumann) if there exists                                                                                                                                    Let J° = R. Since J(jyji+l ) = and R is left Artinian each J^J^ (0 < / < n - 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




       x e R such that axa = a. If every element of R is regular, then R is said to be a                                                                                                                                    has a composition series by Exercises 7 and 8. Use these and Theorem IV. 1.10 to
       regular ring.                                                                                                                                                                                                        construct a composition series for R\ apply Theorem VIII. 1.11.]
444                       CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                            4.     THE PRIME RADICAL; PRIME AND SEMIPRIME RINGS                                                    445


       Remark. Hopkins' Theorem is valid even if the hypothesis "/? has an identity"                        REMARK. The intersection of two left [resp. right] annihilators is also a left
       is replaced by the much weaker hypothesis that r e R rR =
                                                          {     \
                                                                    and Rr =      =         j          [resp. right] annihilator since a(S) fl     a(T) = a(S U T). If 5 and Tare actually left
       0; see L. Fuchs [13; pp. 283-286].                                                              ideals, then a(S) f)         a(T) = a(S U T) = d(S + T).

       (b)   The converse of Hopkins' Theorem is false.

                                                                                                       Proposition 4.2.           A ring R is semiprime if and only z'/R has no nonzero nilpotent
                                                                                                       ideals.
4.    THE PRIME RADICAL; PRIME AND SEMIPRIME RINGS
      We now introduce the prime radical of a ring and call a ring semiprime if it has                      SKETCH OF PROOF. (=») If / is a nilpotent ideal and K is any prime ideal,
zero prime radical (Definition 4.1). We then develop the analogues of the results                      then for some n, I n =           e K,   whence /     Cl Therefore d P(R). Consequently, R
                                                                                                                                                                                             /                               if

proved in Sections 2 and 3 for the Jacobson radical and semisimple rings (Proposi-                     is   semiprime, so that P(R) = 0, then the only nilpotent ideal is the zero ideal.
tions 4.2-4.4). There is a strong analogy between the prime radical, prime ideals,
semiprime rings, prime rings, and the Jacobson radical, left primitive ideals, semi-                        (<=) Conversely suppose that R has no nonzero nilpotent ideals.                                   We must show
simple rings, and primitive rings respectively.                                                        that P(R) = 0. It suffices to prove that for every nonzero element a of R there is a
   The remainder of the section is devoted to a discussion of Goldie's Theorem 4.8,                    prime ideal K such that a $ K, whence a i P(R). We first observe that Ct(R) fl R is a
which is a structure theorem for semiprime rings satisfying the ascending chain con-                   nilpotent ideal of R since
dition on certain types of left ideals. Goldie's Theorem plays the same role here as do
the Wedderburn-Artin Theorems 1.14 and 3.3 for rings with the descending chain                                                       (a(R) n R)(a(R) n R)cz a(R)R = o.
condition on left ideals. In fact Goldie's Theorem may be considered as an extension
                                                                                                   Consequently, d(R) = d(R) fl                      R = 0. Similarly a (R) = 0. If b is any nonzero
                                                                                                                                                                                    r

of the Wedderburn-Artin Theorems to a wider class of rings. A fuller explanation of                element of R, we claim that RbR ^ 0. Otherwise Rb (Z GL(R) = 0, whence Rb = 0.
these statements is contained in discussions after Proposition 4.4, preceding Theo-
                                                                                                   Thus b e CL r (R) = 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore RbR is a nonzero ideal of R
rem 4.8 and after Corollary 4.9.                                                                   and hence not nilpotent. Consequently bRb ^ (otherwise (RbR) 2 C RbRbR = 0).
      This section is not needed in the sequel.                                                    For each nonzero b e R choose f(Jb) e bRb such that f(b) ^ 0. Then by the Recursion
                                                                                                   Theorem 6.2 of the Introduction there is a function # N —> R such that                    :




                                                                                                                                      <p(0)    = a    and    <p(n   + 1) = /(*>(/!».
Definition 4.1. The prime radical P(R) of a ring R is the intersection of all prime
ideals ofR. IfR has no^prime ideals, then P(R) = R. A ring R such that P(R) =     is               Let a n = <p(n) so that a n+          i
                                                                                                                                             = f(a n ) ^ 0. Let 5 =             |
                                                                                                                                                                                        /'
                                                                                                                                                                                             > Oj Use Zorn's Lemma to
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .




said to be semiprime.                                                                              find an ideal        K that is maximal with respect to the property K fl 5 =                                     (since   £    S
                                                                                                   there is at least one ideal disjoint from S).

      REMARKS. The prime radical (also called the Baer lower radical or the McCoy                                          K and K ^ R. To complete the proof we need only show
                                                                                                            Since a = a eS, a $

radical) is the radical with respect to a certain radical property, as defined in the in-          that K is prime. If A and B are ideals of R such that A jzf K and B $zf K, then
troduction to Section 2; for details, see Exercises 1 and 2. A semiprime ring is one               (A + K) fl 5 5*     and (B + K) fl 5 ^     by maximality. Consequently for some
that is semisimple with respect to the prime radical (see the introduction to Section 2).          J, ai s A + K and aj e B + K. Choose m > max ij] Since a n +i = f(a n ) e a n Ra n
                                                                                                   z                                                                        {
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .




We use the term "semiprime" to avoid both awkward phrasing and confusion with                      for each n,          it    follows that a m e (a i Ra ) fl (a.Ra-)
                                                                                                                                                             l                      C (A + K)            (1   (B   + K). Con-
Jacobson semisimplicity. The relationship of the prime radical with the Jacobson                   sequently,

radical is discussed in Exercise 3.
                                                                                                                            a m+l = f(a m ) s a m Ra m   C (A + K)(B + K) C AB + K.
      Just as in the case of the Jacobson radical, there is a close connection between the         Since a m +\ \ K, we must have AB £Zf K. Therefore                      K is a prime ideal.
prime radical of a ring R and the nilpotent ideals of R. In order to prove one such
result, we must recall some terminology.                                                                    A ring R is said to be a prime ring if the zero ideal is a prime ideal (that is, if /, J
      Let 5 be a subset of a ring R. By Theorem 1.4 the set {r e R     |
                                                                           rS = 0|   is   a left   are ideals such that IJ = 0, then / =                     or J = 0). The relationships among prime
ideal of R,  which is actually an ideal if S is a left ideal. The set {r e R   \
                                                                                   rS = 0| is      ideals, prime rings, and semiprime rings are analogous to the relationships between

called the left annihilator of 5 and is denoted d(S). Similarly the set                            left primitive ideals,           primitive rings, and semisimple rings. In particular,                             we note
                                                                                                   the following:
                                 (US) = {reR Sr = 0}
                                                  |

                                                                                                            (i)    The prime [resp. Jacobson] radical is the intersection of all prime [resp.
is a right ideal of R that is an ideal if 5 is a right ideal. d r (S) is called the right          primitive] ideals (see Theorem 2.3(iii)).

annihilator of S.     A
                     left [resp. right] ideal / of R is said to be a left [resp. right]                     (ii)   Every prime ring is semiprime since               is   a prime ideal. This corresponds to
annihilator if / = a(S) [resp. / = GL r (S)] for some subset^ of R.                                the fact that every primitive ring is semisimple (Theorem 2.10(i)).
                                        I




446                     CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                    4.   THE PRIME RADICAL; PRIME AND SEMIPRIME RINGS                                                        447


Proposition 4.3. K is a prime ideal of a ring R // and only if R/K is a prime ring.                     Definition 4.5.            A ring R is said to be a (left) Goldie ring //

      REMARK. This is the analogue of Definition 2.1 (left primitive ideals).
                                                                                                                (i)    R satisfies the ascending chain condition on left annihilators;
                                                                                                               (ii)    every independent set of left ideals ofR is finite.

      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 4.3. If R/K is prime, let                      tt   :   R   R/K be the
                                                                                                               REMARKS, (i) Condition (i) of Definition 4.5 means that given any chain of
canonical epimorphism. If / and / are ideals of R such that //               C K, then   7r(/), 7r(/)
                                                                                                        left annihilators (2(50              CZ <2(S 2 )    C   •   •   •   ,   there exists an n such that <2(St ) = Q(S n ) for
are ideals of R/K (Exercise 111.2.13(b)) such that ir{I)ir{J) = tt(//) = 0. Since R/K is
                                                                                                        all i    > n. This condition is equivalent to the condition
prime, either ir(I) =      or w(J) = 0; that is, /       C K or / C K. Therefore, K      is a prime

ideal (Definition III.2.14). The converse is an easy consequence of Theorem III. 2. 13                     (i') R satisfies the maximum condition on left annihilators {that is, every non-

and Definition III.2.14.                                                                                empty set of left annihilators contains a maximal element with respect to set
                                                                                                        theoretic inclusion).
      The final part of the semiprime-semisimple analogy is given by
                                                                                                        To see this one need only observe that the proof of Theorem VIII. 1.4 carries over to
                                                                                                        the present situation, mutatis mutandis.

                                                                                                               (ii)    Right Goldie rings are defined in the obvious way. A right Goldie ring need
Proposition 4.4. A ring R is semiprime if and only ifK'is isomorphic to a subdirect                     not be a left Goldie ring; see A. W. Goldie [62].
product ofprime rings.

                                                                                                               EXAMPLE. Every left Noetherian ring R is a left Goldie ring. Condition (i) is
      SKETCH OF PROOF. Proposition 4.4 is simply Proposition 3.2 with the                               obviously satisfied. If {/, j e/j were an infinite independent set of left ideals, then
                                                                                                                                                        |




words "semisimple" and "primitive" changed to "semiprime" and "prime" re-                                                                                                       C                           C
                                                                                                        there would exist IU I2      such that h
                                                                                                                                         ,   .     -h X h CZ h X h X h
                                                                                                                                                        .                          which con-                   •   •   •   ,


spectively. With this change and the use of Proposition 4.3 in place of Definition 2.1,
the proof of Proposition 3.2 carries over verbatim to the present case.                                 tradicts the ascending chain condition. Therefore (ii) is satisfied and                                         R is a Goldie
                                                                                                        ring. There do exist left Goldie rings that are not left Noetherian rings.

      We have seen that primitive rings are the basic building blocks for semisimple
rings. Proposition 4.4 shows that the basic building blocks for semiprime rings are                            The preceding example shows that the class of semiprime left Goldie rings con-
the prime rings. At this point the analogy between primitive and prime rings fails.                     tains the class of semiprime left Noetherian rings. Our characterization of semiprime

Primitive rings may be characterized in terms of familiar matrix rings and endomor-                     left    Goldie rings will be given in terms of their left quotient rings, in the sense of
phism rings of vector spaces (Section 1). There are no comparable results for prime                     the following definitions.

rings. But the situation is not completely hopeless. We have obtained very striking
results for primitive and semisimple left Artinian rings (Sections 1 and 3). Conse-
quently it seems plausible that one could obtain useful characterizations of prime                      Definition 4.6.           A nonzero element a in a ring R is said to be regular //a is neither a
and semiprime rings that satisfy certain chain conditions. We shall now do precisely                    left nor right zero divisor.

that.
    We first observe that in a left Artinian ring the prime radical coincides with the
Jacobson radical (Exercise 3(c)). Consequently, left Artinian semiprime rings are                       Definition 4.7.           A ring Q(R) with identity is said to be a left quotient ring ofa ring R //
also semisimple, whence their structure is determined by the Wedderburn-Artin
                                                                                                                (i)    R c Q(R);
Theorem 3.3. Since every semiprime (semisimple) left Artinian ring is also left
                                                                                                               (ii)    every regular element in R is a unit in Q(R);
Noetherian by Corollary 3.4, the next obvious candidate to consider is the class of
                                                                                                               (iii)   every element c ofQ(R) is of the form c = a _1 b, where a,b s R and a is regular.
semiprime left Noetherian rings (that is, semiprime rings that satisfy the ascending
chain condition on left ideals). Note that there are semiprime left Noetherian rings
that are not left Artinian (for example, Z). Consequently, a characterization of semi-
                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                              REMARKS, (i) ring R need not have a left quotient ring. If it does, however, it
                                                                                                        is   easy to see that Q(R) is determined up to isomorphism by Definition 4.7.
prime left Noetherian rings would be a genuine extension of our previous results.
      We shall actually characterize a wider class of rings that properly includes the                         (ii)    A right quotient ring of R is defined in the same way, except that "c = a~ b"                              l


                                                                                                        is replaced by. "c       = bar in condition (iii). A ring may have a right quotient ring,
                                                                                                                                                 1 "'

class of all semiprime left Noetherian rings. The class in question is the class of all
                                                                                                        but no left quotient ring (see N. J. Divinsky [22; p. 71]).
semiprime left Goldie rings, which we now define.
                                                                                                               (iii)   If   R is a ring that has a left quotient ring Q(R) = T, then R is said to be a
   A family of left ideals of R    j e / is said to be independent provided that for
                                    {
                                            }
                                             -



                                                 \
                                                     j

                                                                                                        left order in T.
each k e/, /* D Ik * = 0, where Ik * is the left ideal generated by {/ |y ^ /c    In 3
                                                                                               }   .




other words, |/ \j e/j is independent if and only if the left ideal / generated by
                    ;


                 actually the internal direct sum / = ]L l i (see Theorem IV.1.15).
                                                                                                            EXAMPLE. Let R be a commutative ring that has at least one regular element.
|/; lye/}   is
                                                                                                        Let S be the set of all regular elements of R. Then the complete ring of quotients S~ l R
448                      CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                      4.   THE PRIME RADICAL; PRIME AND SEMIPRIME RINGS                                    449



                      (Theorem III.4.3) that contains an isomorphic copy (fs(R) of R
is a ring with identity
                                                                                                                                                                          EXERCISES
(Theorem IIL4.4(ii)). If we identify R and <p s (R) as usual, then R      S^R, every                      C                       Note: R is always a ring.
regular element of R is a unit in S~*R (Theorem III.4.4(i)) and every element of S~ l R
is of the form s~ r (r e R s e S
                    l
                                         f
                                                d
                                     R). Therefore S~*R is a left quotient ring of R.                                       1 .    A subset T of R is said to be an m-system (generalized multiplicative system) if
Special case: the rational field              Q is a left quotient ring of the left Noetherian ring Z.                                                      c,d eT   =>    cxd e T   for some x e R.


      EXAMPLE. Every semisimple left Artinian ring is its own left quotient ring                                                        (a)   P is a prime ideal of R if and only if R — P is an w-system. [Hint: Exercise
(Exercise 6).                                                                                                                     III.2.14.]
                                                                                                                                        (b) Let / be an ideal of     R that is disjoint from an w-system T. Show that / is
               from Definition 4.7 that the structure of a left quotient ring Q(R) is
      It is clear                                                                                                                                     Q which is maximal respect to the property that
                                                                                                                                  contained in an ideal

intimately connected with the structure of the ring R. Consequently, if one cannot ex-                                            Q fl T = 0. Then show that Q is a prime ideal. [Hint: Adapt the proof of
plicitly describe the ring R in terms of well-known rings, the next best thing is to
                                                                                                                                  Theorem VIII.2.2.]
show that R has a left quotient ring that can be explicitly described in such terms.                                                    (c)   An element r of R is said to have the zero property if every w-system that
This is precisely what Goldie's Theorem does.                                                                                     contains r also contains 0. Show that the prime radical P(R) is the set                     M of  all
                                                                                                                                  elements of R that have the zero property. [Hint: use (a) to show                     M (Z P(R) and
                                                                                                                                  (b) to show P(R)    M.]   c
                                                                                                                                        Every element c of P(R) is nilpotent. [Hint: {c i > 1 is an w-system.] If
                                                                                                                                        (d)                                                      %


Theorem 4.8. (Goldie) R is a semiprime [resp. prime] left Goldie ring if and only if                                                                                                                 \         }



                                                                                                                                  R is commutative, P(R) consists of all nilpotent elements of R.
R has a left quotient ring Q(R) which is semisimple [resp. simple] left Artinian.
                                                                                                                           2. (a)        If / is an ideal of R, then P(I)     = I (1 P(R). In particular, P(P(R)) = P(R).
    Theorem 4.8 will not be proved here for reasons of space. One of the best proofs                                              [Hint: Exercise 1(c).]
is due to C. Procesi and L. Small [65]; a slightly expanded version appears in I. Her-                                            (b) P(R) is the smallest ideal K of R such that P(R/K) = 0. In particular,
stein [24]. Although long, this proof is no more difficult than many proofs presented                                             P(R/P(R)) = 0, whence R/P(R) is semiprime. [Hint: Exercise 111.2.17(d).]
earlier in this chapter. It does use Ore's Theorem, a proof of which is sketched in                                               (c) An ideal / is said to have the zero property if every element of / has the zero

I. N. Herstein [24; p. 170] and given in detail in N. J. Divinsky [22; p. 66].                                                    property (Exercise 1(c)). Show that the zero property is a radical property (as
    Since the structure of semisimple left Artinian rings has been completely deter-                                              defined in the introduction to Section              2),   whose        radical   is   precisely P(R).
mined, Theorem 4.8 gives as good a description as we are likely to get of semiprime
left Goldie rings (special case: semiprime left Noetherian rings). The "distance"
                                                                                                                           3.     (a)    Every semisimple ring is semiprime.
between the rings R and Q(R) is the price that must be paid for replacing the                                                     (b)    P(R)    c
                                                                                                                                                 J(R). [Hint: Exercise 1(d); or (a) and Exercise 2(b).]

descending chain condition with the ascending chain condition. For as we observed                                                 (c)    If   R is left Artinian, P(R) = J(R). [Hint: Proposition 2.13.]
in the discussion after Proposition 4.4 and in Exercise 3.13, the latter is a consider-
                                                                                                                           4.     R is semiprime if and only if for all ideals A, B
ably weaker condition than the former.
                                                                                                                                                                AB =        =>   A C\ B = 0.
                                                                                                                           5.     (a)    Let R be a ring with identity. The matrix ring Mat n R is prime if and only if R
Corollary 4.9. R is a semiprime [resp. prime] left Goldie ring if and only ifR has a
                                                                                                                                       prime.
                                                       X Mat nk D k [resp. Q(R) ^
                                                                                                                                  is
quotient ring Q(R) such that Q(R) ^ Matn^i X                         •   •   •
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                       R is any ring, then P(Mat n tf) - Mat n PCR). [Hint: Use Exercise 2 and part
                                                                                                                                  (b) If
M<2/ ni Di], where n u   .   .   .
                                     ,   n k are positive integers and Dj,       .   .   .   ,   D n are division rings.
                                                                                                                                      R has an identity. In the general case, embed R in a ring S with identity via
                                                                                                                                  (a) if

                                                                                                                                  Theorem III.1.10; then P(R) = R f] P(S) by Exercise 2.]
      PROOF. Theorems 1.14, 3.3, and 4.8.
                                                                                                                           6.     IfR is semisimple left Artinian, then R is its own quotient ring. [Hint: Since R
      Goldie's Theorem, as rephrased in Corollary 4.9, may be thought of as an exten-                                             has an identity by Theorem 3.3, it suffices to show that every regular element ofR
sion of the Wedderburn-Artin Theorems 1.14 and 3.3 to a wider class of rings. For                                                 is   actually a unit. By Theorem 3.3 and a direct argument                  it   suffices to assume
instance, Theorem 3.3 states that a semisimple left Artinian ring is a direct product of                                          R = Mat n D for some division ring D. Theorem VIL2. 6 and Proposition VII.2. 12
matrix rings over division rings. Goldie's Theorem states that every semiprime left                                               may be helpful.]
Goldie ring has a quotient ring that is a direct product of matrix rings over division
rings. But every semisimple left Artinian ring is a semiprime left Goldie ring (Corol-
                                                                                                                           7.     The following are equivalent:
lary 3.4, Exercise 3(a), and the Example after Definition 4.5). Furthermore every                                                      (a)    R is prime;
semisimple left Artinian ring is its own quotient ring (Exercise 6). Thus Goldie's                                                     (b) a,b e     R and aRb =     imply a =       or b = 0;
Theorem reduces to the Wedderburn-Artin Theorem in this case. An analogous ar-                                                         (c)    the right annihilator of every nonzero right ideal of R is 0;

gument holds for simple left Artinian rings and Theorem 1.14.                                                                          (d) the left annihilator of every nonzero left ideal of             R is 0.
450                       CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                       5.   ALGEBRAS                                        451


 8.   Every primitive ring is prime [see Exercise 7].                                                A left Artinian K-algebra is a A'-algebra that satisfies the descending chain condi-
                                                                                                 tion on left algebra ideals.A left Artinian AT-algebra may not be a left Artinian ring
 9.   The center of a prime ring with identity is an integral domain. [See Exercise 7;
                                                                                                 (Exercise 1).
      for the converse see Exercise 10.]

10.   Let J be an integral domain and let F be the complete field of quotients of J. Let             EXAMPLE. If D is a division algebra over K, then Mat n Z) is a AT-algebra (p.
      R be the set of all infinite matrices (row, columns indexed by N*) of the form             227) which is left Artinian by Corollary VIII. 1.1 2.


                                                     o
                                                                                                 Definition 5.1. Let A be an algebra over a commutatuve ring                      K with identity.
                                                                                                      (i) A left (algebra) A-module is a unitary left K-module    such that   M is a left   M
                                                                                                 module over the ring A and k(rc) = (kr)c = r(kc) for all k e K, r e A, c e M.
                                                                                                     (ii) An A-submodule of an A-module                 M
                                                                                                                                             is a subset ofM which is itself an algebra

                                                                                                 A-module {under the operations in M).
      where A n s Mat n (F) and d s J CI F.                                                         (iii) An algebra A-module              M
                                                                                                                                  is simple {or irreducible) //              AM
                                                                                                                                                                   ^ and has no              M
         (a)   R is a ring.                                                                      proper A-submodules.
         (b)   The center of R is the set of all matrices of the form                               (iv) A homomorphism f                  M
                                                                                                                              —> N of algebra A-modules is a map that is both a
                                                                                                                                       :




                                                                                                 K-module and an A-module homomorphism.
                                   fd
                                        d                                                           REMARKS. If A is a ^-algebra the term "^-module" will always indicate an
                                              d                                                  algebra ^-module. Modules over the ring A will be so labeled.                A right /4-module Wis
                                                                                                 defined analogously           and    satisfies   k{cr)   = {kc)r = c{kr) for all k e K, r e A, c e N.

                                                                                                    Simple ^-algebras, primitive /C-algebras, the Jacobson radical of a ^-algebra,
                                                                                                 semisimple AT-algebras, etc. are now defined in the same way the corresponding con-
      with d £ J and hence is isomorphic to J.                                                   cepts for rings were defined, with algebra ideals, modules, homomorphisms, etc. in
         (c)   R is primitive (and hence prime by Exercise 8).                                   place of ring ideals, modules, and homomorphisms. In order to carry over the results
                                                                                                 of Sections 1-3 to ^-algebras (in particular, the Wedderburn-Artin Theorems) the
11.   The nil radical N{R) of R is the ideal generated by the set of all nil ideals of R.
                                                                                                 following two theorems are helpful.
        (a) N{R) is a nil ideal.
        (b) N{N{R)) = N{R).
        (c) N{R/N{R)) = 0.
                                                                                                 Theorem 5.2. Let A be a K-algebra.
        (d) P(R) a N{R) <= J{R).
        (e) If R is left Artinian, P{R) = N{R) = J{R).                                               (i)   A subset I of A is a regular maximal left algebra ideal if and only if I is a
         (f)   If   R is commutative P{R) = N{R).                                                regular maximal left ideal of the ring A.
                                                                                                    (ii)   The Jacobson radical of the ring A coincides with the Jacobson radical of the
                                                                                                 algebra A. In particular A is a semisimple ring if and only if            A is a semisimple algebra.
5.    ALGEBRAS
                                                                                                    REMARK. Theorem 5.2 is trivial if A has an identity since algebra ideals and
    The concepts and results of Sections 1-3 are carried over to algebras over a com-            ring ideals coincide in this case.
mutative ring K with identity. In particular, the Wedderburn-Artin Theorem is
proved for ^-algebras (Theorem 5.4). The latter part of the section deals with                      PROOF OF 5.2. (i) If / is a regular maximal left ideal of the ring A,                    it   suffices
algebras over a field, including algebraic algebras and the group algebra of a                   to show that kl (Z / for all k e K. Suppose kl $ZL I for some k e K. Since r{kl) = k{rl)
finite group. Throughout this section K is always a commutative ring with identity.              by Definition 5.1(i), / + kl is a left ideal of A that properly contains /. Therefore,
                                                                                                 A = I + kl by maximality. By hypothesis there exists e e A such that r - re e I for
      The first step in carrying over the results of Sections 1-3 to AT-algebras is to review    all r e A. Let e = a + kb {a,b e /). Then

the definitions of a A'-algebra, a homomorphism of A>algebras, a subalgebra and an
                                                                                                                         e2   = e{a + kb) = ea + e{kb) = ea + {ke)b e /.
algebra ideal (Section IV. 7). We recall that if a K-algebra A has an identity, then {left,
right, two-sided) algebra ideals coincide with {left, right, two-sided) ideals of the ring   A   Since e — e   2
                                                                                                                   e / and e 2 e /,   we must have e e /. Consequently, the fact that r — re e /
(see the Remarks after Definition IV.7.3). This fact will be used frequently without             for all r e A implies A       = I. This contradicts the maximality of /. Therefore, kl (Z /
explicit mention.                                                                                for all k e K.
452                            CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                    5.   ALGEBRAS                                                         453


      Conversely let / be a regular maximal left algebra ideal and hence a regular left                                                       The remainder of this section deals with selected topics involving algebras over a
ideal of the ring A. By Lemma 2.4 / is contained in a regular maximal left ideal h of                                                     field. We first obtain a sharper version of Theorem 5.4 in case K is an algebraically
the ring A. The previous paragraph shows that h is actually a regular left algebra                                                        closed field and finally we consider group algebras over a field.
ideal, whence /           = h by maximality.                                                                                                  If A is a nonzero algebra with identity over a field K, then the map a K — A, de-                   :   >


      (ii)    follows from (i) and Theorem 2.3(ii).                                                                                       defined by k\-^> kl A is easily seen to be a homomorphism of ^-algebras. Since
                                                                                                                                                                  ,



                                                                                                                                          a(\ K ) = 1a 9^ 0, ker a ^ K. But the field K has no proper ideals, whence Ker a =0.
                                                                                                                                          Thus a is a monomorphism. Furthermore the image of a lies in the center of A since
                                                                                                                                          for all k e K, r e A:
Theorem 5.3. Let A be a K-algebra. Every simple algebra A-module is a simple
module over the ring A. Every simple module                          M    over the ring A can be given a unique                                              a(k)r = (k\ A )r = k(l A r)\ A = (\ A r)(kl A ) = ra(k).
K-module structure in such a way that                     M
                                         is a simple algebra A-module.
                                                                                                                                          Consequently we adopt the following convention:

      PROOF. Let N be a simple algebra /^-module, whence AN ^ 0. If N is a sub-                                           x                  // A is a nonzero algebra with identity over a field K, then K is to be identified with
module of N, then ANi is an algebra submodule of N, whence AN = Nor ANi = 0.                               Y                              Im a and considered to be a subalgebra of the center of A.
IfANi = AT, then              M
                     = NAf AN, = 0, then Ni C D = {ceN\Ac = Oj.ButDis
                                                                                                                                          Under this identification the ^-module action of K on A coincides with multiplica-
an algebra submodule of N and D ?± N since AN ^ 0.- Therefore D =       by sim-
                                                                                                                                          tion by elements of the subalgebra K in A since ka — (k\ A )a = a(k)a.
plicity, whence    = 0.   M
                        Consequently, TV has no proper submodules and hence is a

simple module over the ring A.
   If     M
       is a simple module over the ring A, then     is cyclic, say = Ac (c e M),   M                           M                          Definition 5.5.    An element & of an algebra A over a field K is said to be algebraic
by Remark (iii) after Definition 1.1. Define a ^-module structure on   = Ac by                                          M                 over K if a is the root of some polynomial in K[x]. A is said to be an algebraic algebra

                                            k{rc)   = (kr)c,     (k e K, r e A).                                                          over   K if every element of A is algebraic over K.
Since kreA, (kr)c is an element of Ac = M. In order to show that the action of                                                       K         EXAMPLE. If A is finite dimensional then A is an algebraic algebra. For if
on    M      is   well defined we must show that                                                                                                 = n and a e A, then the n + 1 elements a,a 2 ,a
                                                                                                                                          dirriA-^                                                   a n+1 must be linearly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,   .   .   .    ,




                              rc   = r^c     =>     (kr)c = (kr^c,                 (k e K\ rji e A).                                      dependent. Thus kia+ 2 + + n
                                                                                                                                                                k a 2
                                                                                                                                                                            k +ia
                                                                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                                  n+1 = for   some k e K, not all zero. Thus                 {


                                                                                                                                          f(a) =   where / is the nonzero polynomial k x + k 2x 2    Y     h k n+ ix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e K[x].         -\

Clearly it will suffice to prove

                                   rc   =          =>   (£r)c = 0,         (/c      s^re >4).                                                  EXAMPLE. The algebra of countably infinite matrices over a field K with only a
                                                                                                                                          finite number of nonzero entries is       an infinite dimensional simple algebraic algebra
Now by the proof of Theorem         M ^ A/ where the regular maximal
                                               1 .3,             1                                                      left ideal / is
                                                                                                                                          (Exercise 5).
the kernel of the map A — Ac = M given by x h> at. Consequently,       = implies                                   rc

re/. But     an algebra ideal by Theorem
                  / is                      whence kr     Therefore
                                                               5.4,       = and           s /.                     (£r)c                       REMARK. The radical of an algebraic algebra is nil (Exercise 6).
the action of K on M     well defined.
                                   is     now easy to verify that M a ^-module
                                                         It is                                                     is

and an algebra /^-module. The ^-module structure of M         uniquely determined                is

since any ^-module structure on M that makes M = Ac an /^-module necessarily                                                              Lemma 5.6. //D is an algebraic division algebra over an algebraically closedfield^K,
satisfies k(rc)          = (kr)c for all k e K, r e A.                                                                                    then   D = K.
                                                                                                                                             PROOF. K is contained in the center of D by the convention adopted above.
                                                                                                                                          If a e £>, then f(a) =    for some / e K[x]. Since K is algebraically closed
Theorem 5.4. A /s a semisimple left Artinian K-algebra if and only if there is an
                                                                                                                                          f(x) = k(x - ki)(x - k )-  (x - k n ) (k ki e K; k 9* 0), whence
                                                                                                                                                                       2   •
                                                                                                                                                                                          9

isomorphism of K-algebras
                                                                                                                                                                      = f{a) = k(a - k,)(a - k )-                .(a             - kn).
                               A ^ Mat Di X Mat n2 D X                                 X Affl/» D
                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                           •   •   •
                                              nl                      2                          t    t,


                                                                                                                                          Since D is a division ring, a — k { = 0, for some /. Therefore a = k { e                                K and thus
w/zere £«c/z nj /j a positive integer and each Dj a division algebra over K.
                                                                                                                                          dczk.       m

      REMARK. Theorem 5.4 is valid for any semisimple finite dimensional algebra A
over a field K since any such A is left Artinian (Exercise 2).                                                                            Theorem 5.7. Let A be a finite dimensional semisimple algebra over an algebraically
                                                                                                                                          closed field K. Then there are positive integers n u           .       .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n t and an isomorphism of
                                                                                                                                          K-algebras
      SKETCH OF PROOF OF 5.4. Use Theorems 5.2 and 5.3 and Exercises 3 and
4 to carry over the proof of the Wedderburn-Artin Theorem 3.3 to ^-algebras.                                                                                               A ^ Mat K X
                                                                                                                                                                                    ni         X Mat Dl K.
454                                         CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                           5.     ALGEBRAS                                                             455



    PROOF. By Theorem 5.4 (and the subsequent Remark) A ^ Mat ni A X                                                                 that wg = gw for all g e G, which implies that w is in the center of K(G). Show that

Mat„ 2 A X X Mat n ,A where each A is a division algebra over K. Each A is
                        •   •   •
                                                                                                                                     h;2    = nw = (n\ K )yv, whence w -                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (since /?               |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n).      Thus (i^(G)w)(A:(G)w) =  so that
necessarily finite dimensional over K; (otherwise Mat n -A and hence A would be                                                      the nonzero left ideal K(G)w is nilpotent. Since K(G)w                                                        d J by Theorem 2.12, J ^ 0.
infinite dimensional). Therefore A = K for every   by Lemma 5.6.                               /
                                                                                                                                     Therefore ^(G) is not semisimple.


      A great deal of research over the years has been devoted to group algebras over a                                                     The following corollary (with K the field of complex numbers) is quite useful in
field    (see p. 227).                       They are useful, among other reasons, because they make it                              the study of representations and characters of finite groups.

possible to exploit ring-theoretic techniques in the study of groups.


                                                                                                                                     Corollary 5.9. Let K(G) be the group algebra ofa finite group                                   G over an algebraically
Proposition 5.8. (Maschke) Let K(G) be the group algebra ofa finite group G over a
                                                                                                                                     closed field K. // char                         K=             or char       K = p and p^|G|, then there exist positive
                                                                                                                                     integers n u                            n t and an isomorphism ofK-algebras
field K. IfK has characteristic 0, then K(G) is semisimple. IfK has prime characteristic
                                                                                                                                                             .   .   .   ,




p, then K(G) is semisimple if and only ifp does not divide |G|.                                                                                                                          K(G)     ^ Mat K X  Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •       •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X MatntK.

      SKETCH OF PROOF. Suppose char K =                                                        or p, where p%\G\. If B    is   any          PROOF. Since G is finite, K(G) is a finite dimensional X-algebra and hence left
^-algebra with identity (in particular K(G)), verify that there is a well-defined mono-                                              Artinian (Exercise 2). Apply Theorem 5.7 and Proposition 5.8.
morphism of ^-algebras a                                       :B^
                                   Hom K (B,B) given as follows: a(b) is defined to be
the map ab :B — » B, where ab(x) = bx.
      If g s G, we denote the element l K g of K(G) simply by g. By definition K{G) is a                                                                                                              EXERCISES
^-vector space with basis                                  X = [g g e G) and finite dimension n = \G\. For each
                                                                        \




ue K(G) let                 M
               u be the matrix of a u relative to the basis X. Let g e G with g ^ e.
                                                                                                                                            Note: K is always a commutative ring with identity and A a /f-algebra.
Then for all gi e G, a g (gi) = ggi ^ gi (since G is a group). Thus a Q simply permutes                                              1.    The Q-algebra A of Exercise IV.7.4 is a left Artinian Q-algebra that is not a left
the elements of the basis                                  X and leaves no basis element fixed. Consequently, the                          Artinian ring.
matrix         M of a
                    g               g
                                        relative to the basis A' may be obtained from the identity matrix In by
an appropriate permutation of the rows that leaves no row fixed (see Theorem                                                         2.    A finite dimensional algebra over a field K satisfies both the ascending and de-
VII. 1.2). Recall that the trace, Tr Af„, is the sum of the main diagonal entries of u                                         M           scending chain conditions on left and right algebra ideals.
(see p. 369). It is easy to see that
                                                                                                                                     3.    (a) If        Mis a left algebra ^-module, then (±(M) = {r e A                                                |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rc   =   for all c s M) is
        (i)        Tr   M =     g            for g e G, g 9* <?;                                                                           an algebra ideal of A.
        (ii)       Me = In whence Tr    = n\ K
                                        ,                       M   e         \
                                                                                                                                           (b)       An algebra ideal P of A is said to be primitive if the quotient algebra R/P is
      (iii)           = k\g\ H
                   if u             k
                                  h n gn #(G), then
                                        e                                                                                                  primitive (that is, has a faithful simple algebra 7?/P-module). Show that every
                                                                                                                                           primitive algebra ideal is a primitive ideal of the ring A and vice versa.
                                                       n                                           n


                                                      i=i                                      i=i
                                                                                                                                     4.    Let       M be a simple algebra ^-module.
                                                                                                                                               (a)       D = Hoitia(M,M) is a division algebra over K, where Hom A (M,M) de-
      If the radical J of K(G) is nonzero, then there is a nonzero element v s J with                                                      notes all endomorphisms of the algebra ^-module M.
v = kigi H        h A;„gn We may assume gi = e and &i = \ K (if not, replace v by
                                                 .
                                                                                                                                               (b)       M   is      a left algebra Z)-module.
ki^gi^v, where ^ ^ 0, and relabel). Since K{G) is finite dimensional over K, K(G)                                                                The ring Hom D {M,M) of all Z)-algebra endomorphisms of Mis a X-algebra.
                                                                                                                                               (c)
is left Artinian (Exercise 2). Consequently 7 is nilpotent by Proposition 2.13 (for                                                          (d) The map A — Hom D (M,M) given by r H> a r (where a r (x) = rx) is a
                                                                                                                                                                                     >

algebras). Therefore v s J is nilpotent, whence cx v is nilpotent. Thus by Theorem                                                         A^-algebra homomorphism.
VII.1.3            M
           v is a nilpotent matrix. Therefore Tr    v =    (Exercise VII.5.10). On the    M                                          5.    Let A be the set of all denumerably infinite matrices over a field K (that is, ma-
other hand (i)-(iii) above imply
                                                                                                                                           trices with rows and columns indexed by N*) which have only a finite number of
                                                           n                                           n
                                                                                                                                           nonzero entries.
                                    Tr      M = J2 k Tr Mn = U Tr M + X) k Tr M
                                             v                  i                              c           x   Qi
                                                                                                                                               (a)       A is a simple AT-algebra.
                                                     = Tr Me +              = n\ K    .
                                                                                                                                               (b)         is        an infinite dimensional algebraic ^-algebra.

But ai1«                        since char           K=         or char     K = p and          does not divide |G| = n. This is a    6.    The radical J of an algebraic algebra A over a field # is nil. [Hint: if rej and
                                                                                                                                                                           ^ 0), then r = r'w with u = -kr ^'
               :   5^                                                                     /?

contradiction. Therefore J =     and A^G) is semisimple.                                                                                   A: n r"   + fcn-ir"- H            1
                                                                                                                                                                                         h £«r*     =        (£ t                                l                             1      1




   Conversely suppose char K = p and p n. Let w be the sum in K(G) of all the ele-
                                                                                                                                           —    —kt^kt+ir, whence —u is right quasi-regular, say —u-\-v — uv = Q.
                                                                                                                                                 •   •




                                                                                                                                           Show that = r (-u + v - uv) = -r
                                                                                  \



                                                                                                                                                                                 c                                  1

ments of the basis X; that is, w = gi + g 2 H    h gn £ #(G). Clearly w ^ 0. Verify                                                                                                                                     .}
456                             CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                          6.   DIVISION ALGEBRAS                                                           457



7.       Let A be a ^-algebra and C the center of the ring A.                                                                                                   d   = Z ®      ® ttX* ® U) = Z (Z Wi) ® *  <k

           (a) C is a #-subalgebra of A.                                                                                                                                                                   n                                                             n
              (b) If    K is an algebraically closed field and A is finite dimensional semisimple,                                                                  = Z   ^ + Z (Z
                                                                                                                                                                             'VfliJy (g)® = U® + Z ^®
         then the number / of simple components of A (as in Theorem 5.7) is precisely
         dilute.
                                                                                                                                                       where a { =      E W- Bv                        the minimality of /*, tf t              ^             for all /   > 2. If a e A, then
                                                                                                                                                       the element w = (a              ®   1   B )v     — v(a ®          1 fi ) is   in *7 and


6.       DIVISION ALGEBRAS                                                                                                                                              w = ^a® >>i +                      Z ^®>'^ ~ ^® + Z ®                          >>i         5,*

         We first consider certain simple algebras over a field and then turn to the special                                                                                      n

case of division algebras over a field. We show that the structure of a division algebra
                                                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                                                                                  =2
                                                                                                                                                                                                   - «t«) ® ^.
is greatly influenced by its maximal subfields. Finally the Noether-Skolem Theorem

      proved. It has as corollaries two famous theorems due to Frobenius and                                                                           By the minimality of /*, h> = and aa { — a { a = for all / > 2. Thus aa { = a { a for all
(6.7) is
Wedderburn respectively (Corollaries 6.8 and 6.9). The tensor product of algebras                                                                      a £ A and each a is in the center of A, which by assumption is precisely K. Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                             t



(Section IV.7) is used extensively throughout this section.                                                                                                                                        n                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                   v= U®^i +                   Z^®^= 1a®^i + Z U®aiyi= U® b                                                         9




                                                                                                                                                       where = yi        +
                                                                                                                                                                       5 2 V2          +
                                                                                                                                                                                   an y n e B. Since each a ^
                                                                                                                                                                                           •   •   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                       +        and the yi are linearly in-    t

Definition 6.1.              An algebra A with identity over a fieldK is said to be central simple //                                                  dependent over K, b ^ 0. Thus, since B has an identity, the ideal BbB is precisely 5
A is a simple K-algebra and the center of A is precisely K.                                                                                            by simplicity. Therefore,

         EXAMPLE. Let D be a division ring and let K be the center of D. It is easy to                                                                                   \a®kB = 1a® BbB = (\ A ®KB){\ A ®b)(\ A ®K B)
verify that if d is a nonzero element of K, then d~ e K.               Consequently K is afield.
                                                                                         l                                                                                                 = (l A          ®K   B)v(l A       ®K B)<^U.
Clearly D is an algebra over                  K (with K acting by ordinary multiplication in D).                                                       Consequently,
Furthermore since D is a simple ring with identity, it is also simple as an algebra.
Thus D is a central simple algebra over K.                                                                                                                           ®K B = (A ®K B
                                                                                                                                                                         A                                      1   )(1 A    ®K B) C (A ®K B )U d U.           1



                                                                                                                                                       Therefore U = A ®K B and                            there    is     only one nonzero ideal of A                        ®K    B. Since
    Recall that if A and B are AT-algebras with identities, then so is their tensor prod-
uct A         ®
         K B (Theorem IV.7.4). The product of a        b and a      ®
                                                                   bi is aa®       ®
                                                                                bb\. Here                 x                x
                                                                                                                                                       A ®k B has an identity \ A ®\ B £A                                ®K B) ^     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0,       whence A         ®K B     is   simple.

and below we shall denote the set \ A              {         ® b b B\ by ® B and \a®\ \az A\
                                                                   \
                                                                            e                    \   A    A                       B
                                                                                                                                                          We now consider division rings. If D is a division ring and F is a subring of D
by A          ®
       K 1 B Note that A .  K B = (A    ®                     ®K      ®k
                                                                       \   B )(\ A                   B); see p. 124.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D is a vector space
                                                                                                                                                       containing \ D that is a field, F is called a subfield of D. Clearly
                                                                                                                                                       over any subfield F. A subfield F of D is said to be a maximal subfield if it is not
                                                                                                                                                       properly contained in any other subfield of D. Maximal subfields always exist (Exer-
Theorem 6.2. If A is a central simple algebra over a field K and B is a simple K-al-                                                                                                 F of D contains the center K of D (otherwise F and K
                                                                                                                                                       cise 4). Every maximal subfield

gebra with identity, then A                 ®k B       is   a simple K-algebra.                                                                        would generate a subfield of D properly containing F\ Exercise 3). It is easy to see
                                                                                                                                                       that   F is actually a simple ^-algebra. The maximal subfields of a division ring
                                                                                                                                                       strongly influence the structure of the division ring itself, as the following theorems
         PROOF. Since B is a vector space over K, it has a basis Y and by Theorem                                                                      indicate.
                                                                                         n

IV.5.1 1 every element u of A           ®K B can be
                                             *"
                                                           ^= ® witn ^
                                                                  written
                                                                                     i       i
                                                                                                     «*       >»»          £ y and tne Qi


unique. If U is              any nonzero      of A ® K B, choose a nonzero u
                                              ideal                                                                        e t/   such that
              n                                                                                                                                        Theorem 6.3. Let D be a division ring with center K and let ¥ be a maximal subfield
u    =Y^ a *® y*> with al1 Q ^          i         and 72 minimal. Since /I is simple with identity and                                                 of D. Then D          ®
                                                                                                                                                                       K F is isomorphic (as a K-algebra) to a dense subalgebra of
       =  t       i                                                                                                                                    //o/t?f(D,D), where            D is considered as a vector space over F.
AaxA              is   a nonzero ideal, AaiA = A.                Consequently there are elements r u                                   .
                                                                                                                                           .   .   ,


                                                        t


                                                                                                                        tne element D =
r h s u ...,s t
     t
                         eA such that \ A =        Z W-
                                                   >= i
                                                             r         Since         ^ is an idea1                  '
                                                                                                                                                          PROOF. Hom F (D,D) is an F-algebra (third example after Definition IV.7.1)
                                                                                                                                                       and hence a ^-algebra. For each a e D let a a D —> D be defined by a a (x) = xa. For
X ® b)*, ®
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :



         (0                      1b) is in I/.    Now                                                                                                  each c e F let p e D —> D be defined by c (x) = ex. Verify that a a ,@ c e Hom jP (D,D)
                                                                                                                                                                              :
458                                  CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                                                                     6.   DIVISION ALGEBRAS                                          459


and that a ap c = P c a a for all a e D, c e F. Verify that the map D X F—> Hom F (D,D)                                                                                                   Lemma 6.4. Let A be an algebra with identity over a field'K andT a field containing
given by (a,c)         H
                  <*a/3 c is X-bilinear. By Theorem IV.5.6 this map induces a ^-module                                                                                                    K; then A (x) K F is an ¥ -algebra such that dim K A = dim?(A (x) K F).
homomorphism 6 D (x)K F — UomF (D,D) such that
                             :                         >



                                          n                                 n                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Since Fis commutative and a K-F bimodule, A (g)K F
                                     6   (E
                                         1=1
                                             a ® Ci           i)   =       Z
                                                                           1=1
                                                                                                (fli    £ F>,            C t £ F).
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                          is                 F with b{a®b ) = (a (X) 61)6 = a
                                                                                                                                                                                               a vector space over                     Y        bib (a e A; b,bi e F;
                                                                                                                                                                                          see Theorem IV.5.5 and the subsequent Remark). ^                ®x F      is   a i^-algebra by Theo-
Verify that 6 is a X-algebra homomorphism, which is not zero (since 0(1 d                                                                                                 ®   1   d) is   rem IV.7.4 and is easily seen to be an F-algebra as well. If X is a basis of A over K,
the identity map on D). Since                         D is a central simple and F a simple X-algebra, D ® K F                                                                             then by (the obvious analogue of) Theorem IV.5.11 every element of A           K F can      ®
                                                               0^0 and Ker
                                                                                                                                                                                                          it
is   simple by Theorem 6.2. Since                                                                       is       an algebra ideal, Ker                                            = 0,    be written
whence      is a   monomorphism. Therefore D (x)^ F is isomorphic to the X-subalgebra
Im      of Hom F (D,D). We must show that A = Im                                                             is      dense in Hom jF ( D,D).                         J
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Z ®d= Z ® !^ = Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Xi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ct<Jc t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ® U)   (x t sZ;      s F),


   Z) is clearly a left module over Uom F (D,D) with /</ = f{d)(fe Hom F (D,D), de D).
                                                                                                                                                                                          with the elements x { and Ci uniquely determined. It follows that
Consequently D is a left module over A = Im 0. If d is a nonzero element of £>, then
since   D is a division ring,                                                                                                                                                                                            X®k \f = [x® F \xeX]  l



         Ad =      {   6(u)(d) \ueD(g) K F\                            = (Z c
                                                                                 i
                                                                                        t   ^   |
                                                                                                    /   e N*; c< e F;                :
                                                                                                                                                          a % e D]   = D.                 is a basis of   A (x) K F over F. Clearly dim^^ = [A^J = \X(x)K 1 f| = dim^ (x)K F)

Consequently, D has no nontrivial ^(-submodules, whence D is a simple ^-module.
Furthermore D is a faithful ^(-module since the zero map is the only element / of                                                                                                         Lemma 6.5. Let T> be a division algebra over a field K and A a finite dimensional
Hom F (D,D) such that fD = 0. Therefore by the Density Theorem 1.12 A is isomor-                                                                                                                                     D (x) K A is a left Artinian K-algebra.
                                                                                                                                                                                          K-algebra with identity. Then
phic to a dense subring of Hom&(D,D), where A is the division ring Hom^CD,^) and
D is a lett A-vector space. Under the monomorphism A — Hom A (i),i)) the image of                                        >
                                                                                                                                                                                             SKETCH OF PROOF. D (g)K A is a vector space over D with the action of
/s ^ is / considered as an element of Hom A (D,D).
                                                                                                ^                                                                                         dz D on a generator d (x) of   D®*^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            given by d(di®a) = dd                   ®a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = (d (x) 1 A)(d\ (x) a)
   We now construct an isomorphism of rings F A. Let p F —> A = Hom A (Z),Z))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x                                          l


                                                                                                                                                                                          (Theorem IV.5.5). Consequently every left ideal of D (x)* A is also a D-subspace of
                                                                                                                                              :




be given by c |— > /? c (notation as above). Verify that /? c e A and that P is a monomor-
                                                                                                                                                                                          D($)kA. The proof of Lemma 6.4 is valid here, mutatis mutandis, and shows
phism of rings. If fe A and x e Z), then a x = d(x (x) 1 D ) z A and
                                                                                                                                                                                          that dim^CD (x)K A)  = dirm^. Since dirm^ is finite, a routine dimension argument
                   /(*) = /(lz*) = /K(l^)] = a x (f(\ D )) = f(\ D )x = &(x),                                                                                                             shows that D (x) K A is left Artinian.

where c = /(l z>). In order to show that                                             is an   epimorphism it suffices to prove that
c e F; for in that case f(x)      = cx = p (x) for all x e D, whence f = Pc = Pic). If
                                                                            c


^ s F, then /?„ = 0(1 # (X) 3;) e ^ and a y = d(y ®\ D )zA and
                                                                                                                                                                                          Theorem 6.6. Let D be a division ring with center K and maximal subfield F. Then
                                                                                                                                                                                          (#wkD is finite if and only if dim^F is finite, in which case dim^D = dim^F and
                   cy = f(l D )y = ay(/(lz>» = /MId)) = /(W) = /O'Id)                                                                                                                     dimjtD = (dimKp) 2     .




                           = /WU)) = ft/Oz)) = P V (C) = yC
Therefore c commutes with every element of F. If c \ F, then c and F generate a sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                               PROOF. If dim^F is infinite, so is dim^D. If dimA F is finite, then D K F is a         ®
field   of D that properly contains the maximal subfield F (Exercise 3). Since this                                                                                                                             by Lemma 6.5. Thus D ®> K F is isomorphic to a dense left
                                                                                                                                                                                          left Artinian i^-algebra

                                                                                                                                                  F ^ A.                                  Artinian subalgebra of Hom F (D,D) by Theorem 6.3. The proof of Theorem 6.3
would be a contradiction, we must have c e F. Therefore
   To complete the proof, let vi,   ,v n z D and let wi,       .   .   .                                     {               .           .   .        un       be a subset of D           shows that this isomorphism is actually an F-algebra isomorphism. Consequently,
                                                                                                                                                  ,        )



that is linearly independent over F.                               We claim that                        uu       .   .   .
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                             un   }   is also linearly inde-
                                                                                                                                                                                          there is an F-algebra isomorphism      D (x)K F ^ Uom F (D,D) and n = dim F D is finite
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F^ UomF (D,D) ^ Matn F by Theorem VII.1.4
                                                                                                    {

                                     n                                                                                                                                                    by Theorem 1.9. Therefore D (x)K
pendent over A. If               Z
                                 i   =i
                                                  = 0, (gv e A), tnen                                                                                                                     (and the subsequent Remark). Lemma 6.4 now implies

                                                                                                                                                                                                       dim K D = dim F (D (g) K F) - dim^(Mat n F) - n 2 = (dim^D) 2
                                              =       Z    Si"*'       =    Z        Pci(Ui)        =   Z                                                                                                                                                                        .




where c { e Fand                 = jftfo) =            ci .   The F-linear independence of                                                            {   «i, ...,«„ }      implies       On the other hand dim K D = (dim FZ>)(dim*F) by Theorem IV.2.16. Therefore
that every c t = 0, whence & = yS(0) =                                           for all /. Therefore {«!,...,««}                                                        is linearly      dim^F = dim^D.
independent over A. By the density of /4 in Hom A (D,D) (Definition 1.7), there exists
h e A such that h(ui) = Vi for every  /. Therefore A  is dense in Uom F (D,D).                                                                                                               Recall that if u is a unit in a ring R with identity, then the map  —> R given by
                                                                                                                                                                                          rH> uru~ x is an automorphism of the ring R. It is called the inner automorphism in-
      Theorem 6.3 has an interesting corollary that requires two preliminary lemmas.                                                                                                      duced by u.
                                                                                                                     B



460                  CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                                             6.   DIVISION ALGEBRAS                                                       461



Theorem 6.7. (Noether-Skolem) Let Rbe a simple left Artinian ring and let K be the                                        bined with the isomorphisms (iii) and (iv) above yields an ,4-module isomorphism
center ofR (so that R is a K-algebra). Let A and B be finite dimensional simple                                           of V (with the ,4-module structure (i)) and V (with the ,4-module structure (ii)). Thus
K-subalgebras ofR that contain K. If a A — B is a K-algebra isomorphism that
                                                        :
                                                                                                                          for all a z A and v z V

leaves   K fixed elementwise, then a extends to an inner automorphism ofR.
                                                                                                                                                                        P(av) = 5(5)03(17)).

   PROOF. It suffices by the Wedderburn-Artin Theorem 1.14 to assume                                                      In particular, for de D and ~d =              d®\ A zA,
R = Hom D (V,V), where Vis an ^-dimensional vector space over the division ring D.
The remarks after Theorem VII. 1.3 show that there is an anti-isomorphism of rings                                                            /3(dv)   = p(3v) = a(3)G3(i?)) = (d® UMv) = d0(v),
R = Hom D (V,V) — Mat n Z>. Under this map the center K of R is necessarily mapped
                                                                                                                          whence /3 z Hom D (V,V) = R. Since                     is   an isomorphism,             is   a unit in R. Further-
isomorphically onto the center of Mat n Z>. But the center of Mat n Z> is isomorphic to
                                                                                                                          more for r £ A and r = l^, (x) r e A,
the center of D by Exercise VII. 1.3. Consequently we shall identify K with the center
of D so that D is a central simple ^-algebra.
                                                                                                                                               PKv) = 0[riv)] = /3[rv] = a(?mv)
    Observe that V is a left /^-module with rv = r(v) (vzV\rzR = Hom D (V,V)).
                                                                                                                                                       = (l D ®a(r)mv) = a(r)[p(v)] = [otofflOO,
Since V is a left Z>-vector space, it follows that V is a left algebra module over the
A>algebra    D®  K R, with the action of a generator              of         d®r
                                                                          K R on v z V              D®                    whence /3r = a(r)/3 in R = Hom D (V,V). In other words,
given by
                                                                                                                                                           prp~ l = a(r)               for all       r£^.
                          (d® r)v = d(rv) = d(r(v)) = r(dv).                                                        (i)



If A is the subalgebraD ®K A of D ®K R, then V is clearly a left A -module Simi-                              .
                                                                                                                          Therefore the inner automorphism of R induced by                            extends the map a        :   A — B.
larly if B = D ® K B, then V is a left 5-module. Now the map a =  D ®a A                              \   :




isan isomorphism of ^-algebras. Consequently, V has a second ,4-module structure                                               The division algebra of real quaternions, which is mentioned in the following
given by pullback along a; (that is, av is defined to be a(a)v for v z V, a z A; see p.                                   corollary is defined on pages 117 and 227.

170). Under this second ,4-module structure the action of a generator                of                   d®r
A = Z) (x)/c /4 on y £ F is given by
             (</®r)i? = a(d®r)v = (d®a(r))v = d(a(r)(v)) = a(r)(dv).                                              (ii)
                                                                                                                          Corollary 6.8. (Frobenius) Let      D be an algebraic division algebra over the field R of
   By Theorem 6.2 and Lemma 6.5 A is a simple left Artinian A:-algebra. Conse-                                            real numbers. Then     D is isomorphic to either R or the field C ofcomplex numbers or the
quently by Theorem 3.10 there is (up to isomorphism) only one simple ,4-module.                                           division algebra    T of real quaternions.
Now V with either the ,4-module structure (i) or (ii) is semisimple by Theorem 3.7.
Consequently there are ,4-module isomorphisms                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF. Let K be the center of D and F a maximal subfield. We
                  V = ^2Ui           (corresponding to structure (i))                               and           (iii)   have R CZ K CZ F       d D, with F an algebraic field extension of R. Consequently
                                                                                                                          dim^F < dim^F < 2 by Corollary V.3.20. By Theorem 6.6 dim^ = dim*/7 and
                  V = ^2 IV          (corresponding to structure (ii)),                                           (iv)
                                                                                                                          dimK D = (dim^F) 2 Thus the only possibilities are d\m K D = 1 and dim K D = 4. If
                                                                                                                                                  .

                             j
                                                                                                                          d\m K D = 1, then D = F, and D is isomorphic to R or C by Corollary V.3.20.
                                                                                                                             If d\m K D = 4, then dim^F = 2 = dim F D, whence K = R and F is isomorphic
with each Uu   Wj a simple ,4-module and Ui                     =
                                                Wj for all ij. Since dv = (d® l R )v
                                                                                                                          to C by Corollary V.3.20. Furthermore D is noncommutative; otherwise D would be
(dzD,v z V), every ,4-submodule of V is a Z>-subspace of Fand every ,4-module iso-
                                                                                                                          a proper algebraic extension field of the algebraically closed field C. Since F is iso-
morphism is an isomorphism of D- vector spaces. Since dim D V = n is finite, each
Ui, Wj has finite dimension / over D and the index sets /, J are finite, say
                                                                                                                          morphic to C, F = R(/) for some / £ F such that P =                          -   1 .   The map F -* F given by
                                                                                                                          a   + bi h> a — bi is a nonidentity automorphism of F that fixes R elementwise. By
                     / = {1,2,   .   .   .   ,m]    and          J = {1,2,   .   .    .
                                                                                          ,   5).                         Theorem 6.7 it extends to an inner automorphism of D, given by /3(x) = dxd~ for                                   l


                                                                                                                          some nonzero dz D.
Therefore
                                                                                                                              Since -/ = /?(/) = rf/Y/-   —/J = di and hence /</2 = d*i. Consequently d2 z D
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                    \           W
                                         (771                                                                             commutes with every element of F = R(/). Therefore d2 z F; otherwise d2 and F
                                             2^ Ui ) =
                                             t-i    /
                                                                ^
                                                                t-i
                                                                      dim^t/i = /w/,                and
                                                                                                                          would generate a subfield of D that properly contained the maximal subfield F.
                                                                                                                          Since the only elements of F that are fixed by     are the elements of R and P(cF)
                 dim D V = dim D ( ]C ^/ ) =      dim^, = j/,                                                             = dd2d~ = d2 we have d2 z R. If d2 > 0, then dz R. This is impossible since dz R
                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                                          ,

                                 V=l    /    i= i
                                                                                                                          implies    is the identity map. Thus d2 = -r2 for some nonzero r z R, whence
                                                            m            m
                                                                                                                          (d/r) 2 = — 1. Let j = <//r and £ =   Verify that 1 ,/,/,£} is a basis of D over R and
                                                                      =^   w This isomorphism com-                                                                        //".

whence m = s. Since £/,   ^ Wj for            all
                                                        i=i            j=i
                                                                                 i-
                                                                                                                          that there is an R-algebra isomorphism D      T.             =
                                                                                                                                                                                                 {
462                          CHAPTER IX THE STRUCTURE OF RINGS                                                                                 6.   DIVISION ALGEBRAS                                 463



Corollary 6.9. (Wedderburn) Every finite division ring               D is a field.                             7.   If Z) is finite dimensional division algebra   over its center   K and F is a maximal
                                                                                                                    subfield of D, then there is a /sT-algebra isomorphism £> (x)A F     ^ Mat F, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                n

      REMARK. An elementary proof of this fact, via cyclotomic polynomials, is                                      Ai   = dinvD.
given in Exercise V.8.10.                                                                                      8.   If/4 is a simple algebra finite dimensional over its center, then any automorphism
                                                                                                                    of A that leaves the center fixed elementwise is an inner automorphism.
      PROOF OF 6.9. Let K be the center of D and F any maximal subfield. By
                                                                                                               9.   (Dickson) Let D be a division ring with center K. If a,b e D are algebraic over the
Theorem 6.6 dim A Z) = n 2 where dim*/7 = n. Thus every maximal subfield is a finite
field of order q
                 n
                                 ,



                   where q = \K\. Hence any two maximal subfields F and F' are iso-
                                                                                                                    field   K and have the same minimal polynomial, then b = dad' for some de D.
                                                                                                                                                                                         1

                         ,



morphic under an isomorphism (3                  :   F —> F' that fixes K elementwise (Corollary
V.5.8).  By Theorem 6.7,        is given by an inner automorphism of D. Thus

F' = aFcr for some nonzero a e D.
                  1



   If u e D, then K(u) is a subfield of D (Exercise 3). K(u) is contained in some
maximal subfield that is of the form aFar (for some a e D). Thus D = |J aFa~
                                                          1                                                l




and D* = |J aF*cr l (where Z)*,/7 * are the multiplicative groups of nonzero ele-
           aeD*
ments of D, F respectively). This is impossible unless F = D according to Lemma
6.10 below.




Lemma 6.10. IfG is a finite (multiplicative) group and H is a proper subgroup, then
                                           U xHx~ CZ* G.
                                           xzG
                                                              l




   PROOF. The number of distinct conjugates of H is [G N], where TV is the      :




            H in G (Corollary IL4.4). Since H < N < G and H ^ G, [G N] <
normalizer of                                                                                          :




[G H] and [G H] > 1. If r is the number of distinct elements in (J xHx~\ then
      :                  :




                  r   < 1 + (\H\ - 1)[G N] < + (|//| - l)[G //]
                                       :              1                :




                         = 1 + \H\[G :H]-[G:H] = 1 + \G\-[G                 :       //]   < |G|,
since [G      :   H] > 1.



                                           EXERCISES
1.    If A is a finite dimensional central simple algebra over the field K, then
      A (x)/v A np = Mat n K, where n = dim A ^ and A np is defined in Exercise III. 1.17.
2. If      A and 5 are central simple algebras over a field K, then so is A (x)A                   -




3.   Let D be a division ring and Fa subfield. If de D commutes with every element of
     F, then the subdivision ring F(d) generated by F and d (the intersection of all
      subdivision rings of     D containing F and d) is a subfield. [See Theorem V.I.3.]
4.    If   D is a division ring, then Z) contains a maximal subfield.
5.   If A is a finite dimensional central simple algebra over a field K, then dim A /4 is a
     perfect square.

6.   If A and 5 are left Artinian algebras over a field K, then    ^ (x)A B need not be left
                                                                                     -




     Artinian. [Hint: let       be a division algebra with center K and maximal subfield B
     such that d\m B A is infinite.]
                                                                                                                   1.     FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                               465


                                                                                           1.   FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS
                                                                                                As we have observed frequently in previous chapters the study of any mathe-
                                                                                           matical object necessarily requires consideration of the "maps" of such objects. In
                                                                                           the present case the mathematical objects in question are categories (Section 1.7).               A
                                                                                           functor may be roughly described as a "map" from one category to another which
                                                                                                                                                 A natural transformation, in turn, is a "map"
                                CHAPTER             X                                      preserves the appropriate structure.
                                                                                           from one functor to another.
                                                                                                We begin with the definition of covariant and contra variant functors and numer-
                                                                                           ous examples. Natural transformations are then introduced and more examples

                        CATEGORIES                                                         given. The last part of the section is devoted to some important functors in the theory
                                                                                           of categories, the representable functors.
                                                                                                The reader should review the basic properties of categories (Section 1.7), par-
                                                                                           ticularly the notion of universal object (which is needed in the study of representable
                                                                                           functors).        We shall frequently be dealing with several categories simultaneously.
                                                                                           Consequently, if A and B are objects of a category 6, the set of all morphisms in 6
                                                                                           from A to B will sometimes be denoted by hom e (/4,Z?) rather than hom(/4,#) as previ-
                                                                                           ously.




                                                                                           Definition 1.1. Let G and 2D be categories. A covariant functor T from 6 to 3D (de-
                                                                                           noted T      :   6 — 2D)
                                                                                                               *        /.v   a pair of functions (both denoted by T), an object function that
                                                                                           assigns to each object              CofGan object T(C) o/3D and a morphism function which as-
                                                                                           signs to each morphism f-.C—^Cofea morphism
This chapter completes the introduction to the theory of categories, which was begun
                                                                                                                                         T(f)    :   T(C) -> T(C')
in Section 1.7. Categories and functors first appeared in the work of Eilenberg-Mac-
Lane in algebraic topology in the 1940s. It was soon apparent that these concepts          of 3), such that
had far wider applications. Many different mathematical topics may be interpreted in
                                                                                                (i)    T(lc) = 1t(o for every identity morphism lc ofG;
terms of categories so that the techniques and theorems of the theory of categories
                                                                                                (ii)   T(g of) = T(g) o T(f) for any two morphisms f, g of Q whose composite g of
may be applied to these topics. For example, two proofs in disparate areas frequently
                                                                                           is defined.
use "similar" methods. Categorical algebra provides a means of precisely expressing
these similarities. Consequently it is frequently possible to provide a proof in a cate-
gorical setting, which has as special cases the previously known resultsfrom two                EXAMPLE. The (covariant) identity functor /e C — C assigns each object and
                                                                                                                                                                      :   >



different areas. This unification process provides a means of comprehending wider          each morphism of the category Q to itself.
areas of mathematics as well as new topics whose fundamentals are expressible in
categorical terms.                                                                             EXAMPLE. Let R be a ring and A a fixed left /^-module. For each /^-module C,
   In this book category theory is used primarily in the manner just described    —
                                                                                 as        let T(C) = Hom R (A,C). For each /^-module homomorphism f C —> C, let T( f) be     :




a convenient language of unification. In recent years, however, category theory has        the usual induced map / Hom R (A C) — Hom (A C) (see the remarks after Theo-
                                                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                         >   Ie   9




begun to emerge as a mathematical discipline in its own right. Frequently the source       rem IV.4.1). Then Tis a covariant functor from the category of left /^-modules to the
of inspiration for advances in category theory now comes to a considerable extent          category of abelian groups.
from within the theory itself. This wider development of category theory is only
hinted at in this chapter.                                                                      EXAMPLE. More generally, let A be a fixed object in a category C. Define a co-
   The basic notions of functor and natural transformation are thoroughly dis-                                                                                         C of Q
                                                                                           variant functor h A from C to the category S of sets by assigning to an object
cussed in Section 1. Two especially important types of functors are representable          the set /7.1(C) = hom(//,C) of all morphisms in C from A to C. If /          is a      :   C— C
                                                                                                                                                                                        >




functors (Section 1) and adjoint pairs of functors (Section 2). Section 3 is devoted to    morphism of 6, let h A ( f) hom(//,C) — hom(//,C') be the function given by
                                                                                                                                  :                  >                  fog
carrying over to arbitrary categories as many concepts as possible from well-known         (g e hom(//,C)). The functor h A which will be discussed in some detail below, is
                                                                                                                                         ,




categories, such as the category of modules over a ring.                                   called the covariant hom functor.
   This chapter depends on Section 1.7, but is independent of the rest of this book,
except for certain examples. Sections 1 and 3 are essentially independent. Section 1 is         EXAMPLE. Let Fbe the following covariant functor from the category of sets
a prerequisite for Section 2.                                                              to the category of left modules over a ring R with identity. For each set X, F(X) is

                                          464
466                                      CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                1.   FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                                                                   467



the free       ^-module on X (see the Remarks after Theorem IV.2.1). If / :X —>X' is                                                for each object A and morphism /of C op Conversely, it is easy to verify that every co-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .




         function, let F(f) F(X) — F(X ) be the unique module homomorphism                                                          variant functor on (5 op arises in this way from a contravariant functor on 6.
                                                           f
a                                :              >



/    :   F(X) —> F(X') such that //" = /, where / is the inclusion map X — F(X) (Theorem                      >
                                                                                                                                       Recall that every statement involving objects and morphisms in a category has a
IV.2.1).                                                                                                                            dual statement obtained by reversing the direction of the morphisms (see p. 54). It
                                                                                                                                    follows readily that a statement is true in a category Q if and only if the dual state-
         EXAMPLE. Let (5 be a concrete category (Definition 1.7.6), such as the category                                            ment is true in C op Consequently a statement involving objects, morphisms and a
                                                                                                                                                                  .




of left ^-modules or groups or rings. The (covariant) forgetful functor from (5 to the                                              contravariant functor 5 on Q is true provided the dual statement is true for the co-
category S of sets assigns to each object A its underlying set (also denoted A) and to                                              variant functor 5 on (5 op For this reason many results in the sequel will be proved
                                                                                                                                                                            .




each morphism / A — > A' the function / A — > A' (see Definition 1.7.6).
                             :                                           :                                                          only for covariant functors, the contravariant case being easily proved by dualization.
                                                                                                                                       In order to define functors of several variables, it is convenient to introduce the
                                                                                                                                    concept of a product category. If Q and 2D are categories, their product is the category
Definition 1.2. Le/ 6 aa**/ 3D />e categories. A contravariant functor S from Q to S)                                               6X3) whose objects are all pairs (C,Z)), where C and D are objects of 6 and 33 re-
(denoted S (5 — > 3D) /s a pair offunctions (both denoted by S), an object function which
                     :                                                                                                                        A morphism (C,Z)) -> (C',Z)') of C X 33 is a pair (fg), where / C — C
                                                                                                                                    spectively.                                                                                                              :       »


                     C ofQ an object S(C) o/3D awd # morphism function which as-
assigns to each object                                                                                                              is a morphism of Q and g  D —> D' is a morphism of 3D. Composition is given by
                                                                                                                                                                                    :




signs to each morphism f C — O o/C a morphism
                                     :      *                                                                                       (/'>#') °    = (/' ° f g' ° g)- The axioms for a category are readily verified. The
                                                                                                                                    product of more than two categories is defined similarly.
                                                    S(f)       :   S(C') -> S(C)
                                                                                                                                       Functors of several variables are defined on an appropriate product category.
<?/2D swc/z //z^/                                                                                                                   Such a functor may be covariant in some variables and contravariant in others. For
                                                                                                                                    example, if (5,2D,S are categories, a functor T of two variables (contravariant in the
          (i)   S(lc) = ls(C) far every identity morphism l c
         (ii)   S(g of) = S(f) © S(g) for any two morphisms f, g ofQ whose composite g°f
                                                                                                                                        and covariant in the second variable) from e X 33 to 8 consists of an object
                                                                                                                                    first


is   defined.                                                                                                                                                                             X 33 an object T(C,D) of 8,
                                                                                                                                    function, which assigns to each pair of objects (C,Z)) in e
                                                                                                                                    and a morphism function, which assigns to each pair of morphisms / C —* C,                                       :




         Thus the morphism function of a contravariant functor 5                                    :   C —> 3} reverses the        g :D-+ D' of C X 33 a morphism of 8:
direction of morphisms.                                                                                                                                                             T(fg):T(C',D)-+T(C,D'\
                                                                                                                                    subject to the conditions:
         EXAMPLE. Let R be a ring and 5 a fixed left /^-module. Define a contravariant
functor 5 from the category of left /^-modules to the category of abelian groups by                                                         (i)   T(1c,1b) = It(c.d) for all (C,D) in e X 2D;
              Hom R (C,B) for each ^-module C. If / C -> C is an 7?-module                                                                        T(f of g' o g) = T(fg ) o T(f',g), whenever the compositions f'°fg °g
                                                                                                                                                                                            f                                                                    f
defining 5(C) -                                                                                 :
                                                                                                                                        (ii)


homomorphism, then S(f) is the induced map / Hom (C',fi) — Hom/XCZ?) (see          :       fi             >
                                                                                                                                    are defined in Q and 3) respectively. The second condition implies that for each fixed

the Remarks after Theorem IV.4.1).                                                                                                  object C of 6 the object function T(C, — ) and the morphism function T(l c — ) con-                                  ,



                                                                                                                                    stitute a covariant functor SD — S. Similarly for each fixed object Z) of 3D, T( — ,D)
                                                                                                                                                                                            >



         EXAMPLE. More generally, let B be a fixed object in a category 6. Define a con-                                            and T( — ,l ) constitute a contravariant functor 6 — 8.
                                                                                                                                                        /;                                                                  >


travariant functor /z 5 from Q to the category S of sets by assigning to each object C of
C the set h B (C) = hom(C,£) of all morphisms in e from C to B. If / C                                                :   C* is a
                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE. Hom#( — — ) is a functor of two variables, contravariant in the
                                                                                                                                                                                ,



                                                                                                                                    first   and covariant in the second, from the category 971 of left 7^-modules to the cate-                   1

morphism of C, let /? 5 (/) hom(C',£) -> hom(C,£) be the function given by g h> g ° /
                                     :


                                 5 is called the contravariant horn functor.                                                        gory of abelian groups.
(g- s hom(C',£)). The functor /z


                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE. More generally let Q be any category. Consider the functor that
    The following method may be used to reduce the study of contravariant functors
                                                                                                                                    assigns to each pair (A,B) of objects of 6 the set hom e (A,B) and to each pair of mor-
to the study of covariant functors. If Q is a category, then the opposite (or dual) cate-
                                                                  op are the same as the
                                                                                                                                    phisms /        :   A —> A', g B — B' the function
                                                                                                                                                                      :         >

gory of 6, denoted C op is defined as follows. The objects of C
                                 ,



objects of 6. The set hom e ^(A,B) of morphisms in C
                                                         op from A to B is defined to be
                                                                                                                                                                          hom( fg)              :   hom e (A\B) — hom e (/4,£')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >


the set hom e (£,/0 of morphisms in e from B to A. When a morphism fe hom e {B,A)
is considered as a morphism in hom e °p(A,B), we denote it by /
                                                                       op Composition
                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                    given by h          H
                                                                                                                                                 g ° h o f Then hom e ( - - ) is a functor of two variables from 6 to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,



                                                                                                                                    category S of sets, contravariant in the first variable and covariant in the second.
of morphisms in C op is defined by
                                                                                                                                    Note that for a fixed object A, hom e (^, — ) is just the covariant horn functor h A and
                                                r°/                op
                                                                        = (/°#) op     -                                            h A (g) = hom(l,t,£). Similarly for fixed                                  B hom e ( — ,B) is the contravariant horn
                                                                                                                                    functor h B and h B (f) = hom(/,l 7i ).
         If 5   :   e -» © is a contravariant functor, let 5 C op — © be the unique covariant
                                                                               :           >



functor defined by                                                                                                                      Strictly speaking Horn «(               — —     ,   ) is    a functor on     3TC   X 3TC, but this abuse of language is
                                     5(A)   ==      5(A)            and 5(/ ) = 5(/)
                                                                              op                                                    common and causes no confusion.
                                                                      —
468                                                    CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                            1.       FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                                                469



           EXAMPLE. Let K be a commutative ring with identity. Then the functor                                                            EXAMPLE. Let M be the category of left modules over a ring R and T 9DT — 9TZ
                                                                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :     >



given by                                                                                                                             the double dual functor, which assigns to each module                           /4   its   double dual module
                                                                                                                                     A** = Hom R (Hom R (A, R),R). For each module A let 6A A        A** be the homo- :     ^
                                           T(A U ...,A n ) = A                  l   ®K -®K A
                                                                                      -   •
                                                                                                      n                              morphism of Theorem IV.4.12. Then the assignment A\-> 6 A defines a natural trans-
                                               T(fu...,fn)=fi®---®fn                                                                 formation from the identity functor  to the functor T (Exercise IV.4.9). If the cate-
                                                                                                                                     gory              by the category "U of all finite dimensional left vector spaces over
                                                                                                                                                is replaced
          a functor of n covariant variables from the category of ^-modules to itself.
is
                                                                                                                                     a division ring and T considered as a functor V    — V, then the assignment A\-> 6 A
                                                                                                                                     (A eV) defines a natural isomorphism from Iv to T by Theorem IV.4.12 (iii). Also
          C — 3D and T £> — S are functors, then their composite (denoted 7VTi) is
           If Ti   :       >           2   :

                                                                                                                                     see Exercise 5.
the functor from C to 8 with object and morphism functions given by

                                                                                                                                           Natural transformations frequently appear in disguised form in specific cate-
                                                                                                                                     gories. For example, in the category of /^-modules (and similarly for groups, rings,
                                                                                                                                                      may be made that a certain homomorphism is natural, without any
                                                                                                                                     etc.), a statement
T Ti is covariant if 7\ and T are both covariant or both contravariant. T Ti is con-
     2                                                 2                                                               2
                                                                                                                                     mention of functors. This is usually a shorthand statement that means: there are two
travariant if one 7\ is covariant and the other is contravariant.                                                                    (reasonably obvious) functors and a natural transformation between them.


                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE. If B is a unitary left module over a ring R with identity, then there
Definition 1.3. Let    Q and 3D be categories and S (3 ^ 2D, T:(3—£> covariant                :
                                                                                                                                     is                                      R R B ^B (see Theorem IV.5.7). It is
                                                                                                                                          a natural isomorphism of modules a B                  :
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ®
functors. A natural transformation a S — T is a function that assigns to each object C
                                                                  :       >                                                          easy to verify that for any module homomorphism f:B—>C, the diagram
of G a morphism ac S(C) — T(C) ofS) in such a way that for every morphism
                                   :                       >


f     :   C — C of C, the diagram
               >
                                                                                                                                                                                 R® R B-^+B
                                                                      —2L^r(C)                                                                                                 U®f\         f
                                                               5(C)
                                                                                                                                                                                     R®rC-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     OLC
                                                                |s(/)                Jr(/)
                                                                                                                                     is   commutative. Thus the phrase "natural isomorphism" means that the assignment
                                                               S(C)             7^7X0
                                                                          QIC                                                        B       an defines a natural isomorphism a :T'— >  where 3TC is the category of uni-
                                                                                                                                     tary left tf-modules and T            :   911 -> 311 is   given by B    H R ®R B and f\-> \r ®f
//i       2) /j commutative. If ac is an equivalence for every                                    C in C, then a is a natural iso-
morphism (or natural equivalence) of the functors S and J-.                                                                                EXAMPLE. If A,B,C are left modules over a ring R, then the isomorphism of
                                                                                                                                     abelian groups
   A natural transformation [isomorphism] :S — 7* of contravariant functors                       >


S,T C — 2) is defined in the same way, except that the required commutative dia-
           :           >
                                                                                                                                                            :   Hom R (A © B,C) ^ Uom R (A,C) © Hom^C)
gram is:                                                                                                                             of Theorem IV.4.7 is natural. One may interpret the word "natural" here by fixing
                                                                                                                                     any two variables, say A and C, and observing that for each module homomorphism
                                                                                                                                     f:B—>B' the diagram
                                                               5(C)      ^L^T(C)
                                                                \S(f)                 T(f)                                                          Hom R (A © B\C)                     »   Hom«(/l,0        © Hom    R (B',C)

                                                               S(C') —                                                                    Hom(U©/,l c )                                                          Hom(Ulc)© Horn (f\ c         )
                                                                                                                                                                     [

                                                                                                                                                    Hom R (A © £,C)              —^ Hom^C) © Hom«(£,C)       J


for each morphism /                    C — C of (B.>


                                                                                                                                                                          ® A®
                                   :


                                                                                                                                     is commutative, where \ A          f:     B                    A®
                                                                                                                                                                                         B' is given by (a,b) h> («,/(£)). Thus
                                                                                                                                          defines a natural      isomorphism of the contravariant functors 5 and 7\ where
           REMARKS. The composition of two                                    natural transformations is clearly a natural
transformation. Natural transformations of functors of several variables are defined
analogously.
                                                                                                                                              5(5) = Hom^/i              © B,C) and 7X#) = Hom (A,C) © Hom*(£,C).R

                                                                                                                                     One says that the isomorphism                   is natural in B.      A similar argument shows that      <f>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    is

                                                                                                                                     natural in A and C as well.
   EXAMPLE. If T 6 — 6 is any functor, then the assignment C\-> W) defines a
                               :               >

                                                                                                                                           Other examples are given in Exercise 4.
natural isomorphism 7r :T—*T, called the identity natural isomorphism.
470                                                CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                         1.       FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                                                  471


Definition 1.4. Let T be a covariant functor from a category Q to the category S of                                                            (i) If a  hu — T zs # natural transformation from the covariant horn functor hx to
                                                                                                                                                          :          >


sets.T is said to be a representable functor if there is an object A in (2 and a natural                                                   T #A2<y u = «a(1 a) £ T(A), //z?aj /or #/7>' object CofQ and g £ hom e (A,C)
isomorphism a from the covariant horn functor \\a = hom e (A, — ) to the functor T.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         «c(g) = T(g)(u).
The pair (A, a) is called a representation ofT and T is said to be represented by the
object A.                                                                                                                                      (ii)   //us T(A) tftfd ybr eflc/z object Co/Cfc                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           horn e (A,C) —> T(C) zs //ze wa/?
      Similarly a contravariant functor S                                  :   C — S is said to be representable // there is an            fined by g |— > T(g)(u), then (3 :\\a—>T is a natural transformation such that /3a(1 a) = w.
object      B of C and a natural isomorphism (3 h B —* S, where h B = hom c ( — ,B). The
                                                                                     :




pair (B,/3) is said to be a representation ofS.                                                                                                PROOF, (i) Let C be an object of 6 and gshom e (^,C). By hypothesis the
                                                                                                                                           diagram
    EXAMPLE. Let A and B be unitary modules over a commutative ring K with
                             C let T(C) be the set of all ^-bilinear maps A X B— C.
identity and for each ^-module                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                                                                                                            h A (A) = hom e (A,A)+T(A)
If / C -» C is a ^-module homomorphism, let T(/) T(C) -» 7(C) be the function
        :                                                                                         :




that sends a bilinear map g ^ X B — C to the bilinear map
                                                                                                                                                                              lu(g)                                                     T(g)
                                                        :               ^ Xfl-»C>                                   :                                                                            \                              \

Then Tis a covariant functor from the category Oil of AT-modules to the category S of                                                                                                       h A (C) = hom e C4,C)— r(C)
    We claim that T is represented by the ^-module A ®* B. To see this, define for
sets.

each A'-module C a function                                                                                                                is commutative.       Consequently,

                                               ac   :   Hom^                   (g) K 5,0 -> T(C)                                                                     otc(g)     = «c(# °U) = ac-I^teXUM
by      = //, where     ^ X B —> A ®K B is the canonical bilinear map (see p.
                                   /   :
                                                                                                                                                                                - K//Ate)](U) = (7Xg)a A XlA) = 7T£)[^(U]
211).Now a c (f) A X B —> C is obviously bilinear for each / e Hom K (A ®K B,C).
                      :




By Theorem IV.5.6 every bilinear map g A X 5 — C is of the form gi for a unique               >
                                                                                                                                                      We must show that for every morphism k B — C of C the diagram
                                                                                :

                                                                                                                                              (ii)
AT-module homomorphism g                            :   ^    ® B—>C. Therefore a
                                                                   A
                                                                   -
                                                                                                      c is a bijection of sets (that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :       *


is, an equivalence in the category S). It is easy to verify that the assignment                                              Ch«c
defines a natural isomorphism from h A ® K B to T, whence (A                                             ®K B,a)   is a representa-                                                         /z   A (£)   - hom e 04,£)— 7X#)
tion of T. It is not just coincidence that A (x) K B is a universal object in an appropri-
                                                                                                                                                                                 h A (k)                                            T(/c)
ate category (Theorem IV.5.6).                              We shall now show that a similar fact is true for any                                                                                \                              J

representable functor.                                                                                                                                                                      /z^(0 = hom e (/l,0-^7TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /3c

   Let (A, a) be a representation of a covariant functor T C —* S. Let Q T be the                         :
                                                                                                                                           is commutative.      This fact follows immediately since for any fe hom e (A,B)
category with objects all pairs (C,s), where C is an object of (2 and 5 s T(C). A mor-
phism in Q T from (C,s) to (Z),/) is defined to be a morphism / C —> D of C such that                                                                         Wch A (k)](f) = i8 c (A: o/) =                o f){u) = [7T(«r(/)](i/)
                                                                                                              :




T(f)(s) = t s r(D). Note that /is an equivalence in Q T if and only if /is an equiva-                                                                                                   - r(^)[r(/)( W )] = r(A:)[^(/)]
lence in     C A universal object in the category Q r (see Definition 1.7.9)                                            is   called a
universal element of the functor T.
                                                                                                                                           Therefore      is   a natural transformation. Finally,

     EXAMPLE. In the example after Definition 1.4 the statement that (A (x)A B,a)                                              -

                                                                                                                                                                              (3 A (\ A )        = T(\ A )(u) = \ TiA) (u) = u.              m
is a representation of the functor T J)U — S clearly implies that for each ^-module C
                                                               :                *


and bilinear map / A X B —> C (that is, for each pair (C, /) with / s T(C)), there is a
                          :




unique AT-module homomorphism / A (x) K B — C such that // = /(that is, such
                                                                                                                                           Theorem 1.6. Let T © — S be a covariant functor from a category C to the category
                                                                       :                  *


that T(f)(i) = f with                  /       =    a^^OxMe^®^))- Consequently the pair                                                                                   :             >


                                                                                                                                           S of sets. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the class X of all representa-
04 ®/v 5,/) = (/<                                                               is   a universal object in the category <3\l T         ,

                                                                                                                                           tions ofT and the class            Y of all universal elements ofT, given by (A,a) \-+ (A,a A (l a)).
that is, a universal element of 7\


      With the preceding example as motivation we shall now show that representa-
                                                                                                                                              REMARK. Since a A hom e (/M) -> T(A), a A (\ A
                                                                                                                                                                                    :                                           )       is   an element of T(A).
tions of a functor T          :   6 —* S are essentially equivalent to universal elements of T. We
shall need
                                                                                                                                               PROOF OF 1.6. Let (A, a) be a representation of T and let a A (\ A ) = u e
                                                                                                                                           Suppose (5,^) is an object of Qt- By hypothesis olb h A (B^ = homg(y4,i5) —> T(B) is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *




                                                                                                                                           bijection, whence 5 = «i?(/) for a unique morphism /                 By Lemma 1.5,
Lemma 1.5. Let T Q — S be a covariant functor from a category G to the category
                              :            >                                                                                               T(f)(u) = a 5 (/) = 5. Therefore, /is a morphism in C r from (^,z/) to (5,5). If g is an-
             A be an object ofQ.
5 of sets and let                                                                                                                          other morphism in C T from (^,«) to (B,s) then g e hom e (y4,J5) and T(g)(u) = 5.
472                                    CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                     1.       FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                                                                 473



Consequently, by Lemma 1.5 a B (g) = T(g)(u) = s = a B (f). Since a B is a bijection,                                         and a function         :   T(A) -> Nat(^,D by

f=g. Therefore, /is the unique morphism in e T from (A,u) to (B,s), whence (A,u) is                                                                                                      «hft
universal in Q T Thus (A,u) is a universal element of T.
                        .




   Conversely suppose (A,u) is a universal element of 7\ Let f$     *                     :    /u — Tbe the natural           where /3 is given by Lemma 1 .5 (ii). Verify that                       <f>\f/   and   \f/<t>   are the respective identity
transformation of Lemma 1 .5 (ii) such that for any object C of C, 0c hom c (^,C) ->                        :                 maps. Therefore \p A is a bijection.
r(C) is given by     = T(f)(u). Use T(C), then (O) is in e T Since (A,u) is univer-
                            Mf)                                                               .                                    The naturality statement of the corollary means that the diagrams
sal inC r there exists /ehom e04,C) such that s = T(f)(u) = /3c(/). Therefore C is
                 ,



surjective. If fc(/i) =       then 7X/iX") = 0c(/i) = £c(/2 ) = nf )(u\ whence /                        2
                                                                                                                                                                            Nal(h A J)J^T(A)
and fi  are both  morphisms  in e T from 04,«) to (C,T(f)(u)) = (C,T(f )(u)). Conse-                            2


quently, fx = f by universality. Therefore each £?c is injective and hence a bijection                                                                              wf) J                                          n/)
(equivalence in S). Thus            is a natural isomorphism,      whence (A,f3) is a representation                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                                                                                            Nat(/z B ,r) ~—+~T(B)
of T.
   To complete the proof use Lemma 1.5 to verify that         = ly and 4/<f> = 1*,     <f>yp

where $ :X-+ Y is given by     h> (A,a A (\ A )) and ^ F -> A' is given by C4,w) |->
                                                                             :


                                                                                                                                                                                 Nat(h A ,T)*±^T(A)
04,/3) (0 as in the previous paragraph). Therefore                   is   a bijection.
                                                                                                                                                                    N,(a)                                           a*
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [

Corollary 1.7. Let T :Q      §>bea covariant functor from a category Q to the category
                                                                                                                                                                                     J
                                                                                                                                                                                 Nat(^,S)   — Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                  +~S(A)

S of sets. //(A,a) and(Bfi) are representations ofT, then there is a unique equivalence
f A — B such that the following diagram is commutative for all objects C of Q:
  :         >
                                                                                                                              are commutative, where /          :   A —* B is any morphism of (5, a T —* 5 is any natural        :



                                                                                                                              transformation of functors and N*(f), N*(a) are defined as follows. For each object
                                            h B (C) = hom e (£,C) v p c                                                       C of C and      e Nat(/u,r),


                               hom(/,l c )                                           T{C)                                                                    N*(fWc          :   h B (C) = hom c (Z?,C) -> T(C)

                                             h A (C) = hom e (^,C)           ac                                               is   given by   gh> 0c(g ° f). The map                     N*(cx)   :   Nat(/^,r)               — Nat(/z^,5) is given by
                                                                                                                              0h>«0.
   PROOF. Let u = a A (l A and v = /3 B (\ B ). By Theorem 1.6 (A,u) and (B,v) are
                                       )

universal elements of T,   whence by Lemma 1.7.10 there is a unique equivalence                                                    A representable functor is a functor of one variable that is naturally isomor-
/  A —: B in e
             > such  that T(f)(u) = v. Lemma .5 (i) implies that for any object C of
                                                             1
                                                                                                                              phic to the covariant (or contra variant) horn functor. But for a given category 3D,

C and g e hom e (Z?,C)                                                                                                        hom^( — — ) is a functor of two variables. We now investigate conditions under
                                                                                                                                        ,



                                                                                                                              which a functor T of two variables is naturally isomorphic to hom©( — — ).                                                  ,


                     [a c hom(fl c )](g)   = otcig ° f) = T(g °/)(w)                                                             We shall deal with the following somewhat more general situation. Let Q and £)
                                           = [ng)T(f)](u) = T(g)[T(f)(u)] = T(g)(v)                                           be categories and T Q X 3D —> S a functor that is contra variant in the first variable
                                                                                                                                                         :




                                           = Mg),                                                                             and covariant in the second. If 5 (B —* 3D is a covariant functor, then it is easy to
                                                                                                                                                                                 :




                                                                                                                              verify that the assignments (C,D) f— hom^(S(C),D) and (fg) |— hom£)(S(/),#) de-                        >

so that the required diagram is commutative. Furthermore if f                                     :   A —> B also makes       fine a functor Q X 3D — > S that is contra variant in the first variable and covariant in
the diagram commutative, then for C = B and g =                      \   B   ,
                                                                                                                              the second.

             T(f)(u) = a B (fi) = «*0a                  = «s[hom (/i,UXU)] =                                        =   i>.




Therefore /i = /by uniqueness.                                                                                                Theorem 1.9. Let C and 3D 6e categories andT a functor from the product category
                                                                                                                              C X 3D to the category S of sets, contravariant in the first variable and covariant in the
                                                                                                                              second, such that for each object Co/C, the covariant functor T(C, — ) 3D — S has a                                 :




Corollary 1.8. (Yoneda) Let T             be a covariant functor from a category Q to
                                                   §>                                                                         representation (Ac,q; c ). Then there is a unique covariant functor S                                      :   (5   — 3D such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      >

the category §> of sets and let A be an object of Q. Then there is a one-to-one corre-                                        S(C) = A c and there is a natural isomorphism from homx>(S( — ), — ) to T, given by
spondence between the set T(A) and the set Afa/(h A ,T) of all natural transformations
                                                                                                                                                               « cd         Ao/wa)(S(C),D) -> T(C,D).
from the covariant horn functor h A to the functor T. This bijection is natural in A andT.
                                                                                                                                                                        :




                                                                                                                                  REMARK ON NOTATION. For each object C of C, ^ c is an object in 3D and
          SKETCH OF PROOF. Define a function ^ = \p A                            :   Nat(h A ,T) -> T(A) by
                                                                                                                              a c is a natural isomorphism from hom^Ac,— to T(C,—). Thus for each D in £)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      )


                                              a\^a A (l A )eT(A)                                                              there is an equivalence a c  hom^(A c ,D) —> T(C,D).
                                                                                                                                                               z>   :
                                       A A                        A                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5               >




474                                    CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                          1.       FUNCTORS AND NATURAL TRANSFORMATIONS                                                                                      475



      PROOF OF 1.9. The object function of the functor 5 is defined by 5(C) = A c                                                                  TUl D )a c D (k) = nf,\ D )T(\ck)(uc>) = T(f,k)(uc')
                                                                                                                                                                                      '




for each objectC of 6. The morphism function of 5 is defined as follows. For each                                                                                   = T{\ c ,k)np Ac .)(u c = T(\ c ,k)T(\cJ){u c )                   >)

objectC of C a c Ac hom®( c c ) -> T(C, c ) and u c = a c Ac (\ Ac ) e T(C,A C By
                          :                  ,                                                                  ).                                                                            = n\ c ,k of)( Uc ) = T(\ c ,k oS(f))(u c )
Theorem 1.6 (A c ,u c ) is a universal element of the functor T(C, — If / C— C is                  ).   :   >
                                                                                                                                                                                              = a c D iko S (f))
a morphism of C, let i? =  TX/jWXwcO s T(C,A C >). By the universality of (A c ,u c ) in                                                                                                      = a c D ,hom(S(f),\ D ){k). m
2) there exists a unique morphism /: ,4 C — A c in 2) such that       ,




                                T(\cJ)(u c ) = v = nfiUc'Xuc).
                                                                                                                                                                                                     EXERCISES
Define S(f) to be the morphism /.
                                                                                                                           Note: In these exercises S is the category of sets and functions ;(R is the category of
      Clearly 5(1 c ) =   U c = Isco- If C                       C            C" are morphisms of (B, then by        rings and ring homomorphisms; R is a ring; 3H is the category of left .R-modules and
definition 5(g) is the unique morphism g                     :   A c — /^c such that
                                                                      >       »
                                                                                                                     /^-module homomorphisms; g is the category of groups and group homomorphisms.

                                  7TWXi/c') = 7Xg,W<)(«c").                                                           1.   Construct functors as follows:
                                                                                                                             (a)           A covariant functor g — S that assigns to each group the set of all its
                                                                                                                                                                                                          >

Similarly 5(g © /) is the unique morphism h                       :   A c — ^c" such that
                                                                                  >                                        subgroups.
                                                                                                                             (b)           A covariant functor (R — (R that assigns to each ring N the polynomial
                                                                                                                                                                                                          >


                                 TdcMuc) = T(gof,\ Ac ..Xu c »).                                                           ring N[x].
                                                                                                                             (c)           A functor, covariant in both variables 9TC X 9TC — 9TC such that                                    »

Consequently 5(g) ° 5(/) = g © /is a morphism /* c —»                                 Ac such that
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (AJ)\-*A@B.
               nic^o/)(« c ) = n\c,g)T{\cj){u c ) = nic&nfAAcXuc)                                                            (d)           A covariant functor g — g that assigns to each group G its commutator
                                                                                                                                                                                                      >

                             = ntexuc) = nf,\ Ac »)T{\ c ,£){u c ')                                                        subgroup G' (Definition II.7.7).
                             = T(f,\ Ac »)T(g,l Ac »)(u r ») = rfco/.l^XHc'')
                                                                                                                     2.    (a) If  T (B — 3D is a covariant functor, let Im r consist of the objects
                                                                                                                                                       :                  »
                             = r(i c ,«X«c).
                                                                                                                           \T(C)    Cs 6} and the morphisms {T(/) HQ — r(C) / C -* C a mor-
                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :




                                                                                                                           phism in (B Then show that Im r need not be a category.
Therefore by the uniqueness property of universal objects in 3>nc.-> we must have
                                                                                                                                                            |        .




                                                                                                                           (b) If the object function of T is injective, then show that Im T is a category.

                               S(g)oS{f) = gof=h = S(gof).
                                                                                                                     3.    (a) If 5 C -> £) is a functor, let a(S) = 1 if 5 is covariant and — 1 if 5 is con-
                                                                                                                                                   :



                                                                                                                           travariant. If T3D — 8 is another functor, show that 75 is a functor from Q to 8
              C — 3D is a covariant functor.
                                                                                                                                                                              :           »
Thus 5    :      »
                                                                                                                           whose variance is given by a(TS) = a(T)cr(S).
      In order to show that a          horri£)(S(      — — ) — 7" is a natural isomorphism we need
                                                        ),                >
                                                                                                                           (b) Generalize part (a) to any finite number of functors, 5i d —> C
                                   :




only show that for morphisms /                   :   C — C in <B and g Z) — /)' in 3D the diagram
                                                        >                               :    >
                                                                                                                                                                                                        C2 —                                               :                       2,       2   :



                                                                                                                           ©3,.    Sn Q n
                                                                                                                                   .   .      Qn+1-
                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                '.
                                                                                                                                                                                      *




                                       ho maD (/!c',0)                    ^(C,/))                                    4. (a) If A,B,C                                      are sets, then there are natural bijections:                             A X B — B X A and           >


                                                                                                                           04 XB) X C->A               C).                                X(BX
                          hom(5(/),U)                                                   T(fA D )                           (b) Prove that the isomorphisms of Theorems IV.4.9, IV.5.8, IV.5.9, and IV.5.10
                                                                                                                           are all natural.
                                        homritAc,D)—ZnC,D)
                                                                                                                     5.    Let V be the category whose objects are all finite dimensional vector spaces over
                                                                                                                           a field F (of characteristic 5^2,3) and whose morphisms are all vector-space
                              hom(l Ac ,g)                                              T{\c,g)
                                                                                                                           isomorphisms. Consider the dual space V* of a left vector space                                                                                             V as a left
                                       hom^{A c ,D')                          T(C,iy)                                      vector space (see the Remark after Proposition VII. 1.10).
                                                                                                                             (a) If </>                     :V — V\ is a vector-space isomorphism (morphism of V), then so is
                                                                                                                                                                                  »


                                                                                                                           the dual                        map 4> V * -> K* (see Theorem IV.4.10). Hence 4>~ K* -> V * is
                                                                                                                                                                                      :   x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :                        Y
is   commutative. The lower square is commutative since for fixed C,
                                                                                                                           also a morphism of V.
                                                                                                                             (b) Z)    V —> D is a covariant functor, where Z)(l^) = K* and' /)(</>) = $~\
                                   ac
                                                                                                                                                   :

                                         :   hom^c,-) ->r(C,-)                                                                    For each K in V choose a basis x u
                                                                                                                             (c)                                          x n and let fxl      fXn be the         {
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,   }           {       ,   .   .   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,        )



is a natural isomorphism by hypothesis. As for the upper square let k e hom^Ae ',£>).
                                                                                                                           dual bases of V* (Theorem IV.4.11). Then the map ccv V —> V* defined by                                                 '




Then by Lemma 1.5 (i):                                                                                                     ^»   fxi is an isomorphism. Thus a v  V D(V).                                      :       ^
                                                                        :




476                                                        CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                                            2.   ADJOINT FUNCTORS                                                                      477


        (d)           The isomorphism a v is not natural; that is, the assignment V                                                 H       <*v is not a    Definition 2.1. Ler S C — £)   :           »        WT
                                                                                                                                                                                                  £> — C be covariant functors. S w said to be a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :        »


      natural isomorphism from the identity functor Iv to D. [Hint: consider a one                                                                                   ofT (or T a right adjoint ofS,or (S,T) ah adjoint pair) /'/ there is a natural
                                                                                                                                                           left adjoint
      dimensional space with basis {x} and let </>(*) = cx with c ?± 0, ±1*-.]                                                                             isomorphism from the functor /70W£>(S( — ), — ) to the functor hom e ( — ,T( — )).


 6. (a)   Let 5 C —> £> and r C —> £> be covariant functors and a 5 —> la natural
                               :                               :                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                 Thus if 5 is a left adjoint of T, there is for each C of C and D of D a bijection
      isomorphism. Then there is a natural isomorphism      :T—>S such that /fo =
                                —                                                                                                                                                         ac.D         hom3D(5(C),Z>) -> hom c (C,r(Z))),
      and a/3 = IT where /5 5 > 5 is the identity natural isomorphism and similarly
                                                                                                                                                                                                   :
                                                       :
                                     ,


      for IT [Hint: for each C of C, a c 5(C) —* T(C) is an equivalence and hence has
                  .
                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                           which is natural in C and D. The theory of adjoint functors was first suggested by the
      an inverse morphism (3c T(C) —> 5(C).]               :
                                                                                                                                                           following example.
      (b) Extend (a) to functors of several variables.

                                                                                                                                                              EXAMPLE. Let R, 5 be rings and A R RB S Cs (bi)modules as indicated. By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,                ,


 7.   Covariant representable functors from S to S preserve surjective maps.                                                                               Theorem IV.5.10 there is an isomorphism of abelian groups

 8.   (a)       The forgetful functor 3TC—* S (see the Example preceding Definition 1.2) is
                                                                                                                                                                                    Rom s (A <g) R B,C) 9* Hom^, Hom 5 (£,C)),
      representable.                                                                                                                                       which is easily shown to be natural in A and C (also in E). Note that A (x)/e B is a
      (b)       The forgetful functor Q —* S is representable.                                                                                             right S-module by Theorem IV.5.5 (iii) and Homs(i?,C) a right /^-module by
                                                                                                                                                           Exercise IV.4.4 (c). Let B be a fixed R-S bimodule. Let C be the category of right
 9. (a)         Let P          :   S —> S be the functor that assigns to each set                                      X its power set (set of all         /^-modules and D the category of right 5-modules so that homely) = Hom R (X,Y)
      subsets) P{X) and to each function/: A -> B the map P(f) P(B) — P(A) that                                             :
                                                                                                                                                           and hom-o (U,V) = Hom s (U, V). Then the isomorphism above simply states that the
      sends a subset X of B onto f~ (X) ^ ^- Then P is a representable contra variant
                                                                            l
                                                                                                                                                           functor    —®R B from C to D is a left adjoint of the functor hom s (B,—) from £) to C.
      functor.
      (b) Let the object function of                                        Q       S -> S be defined by                   = ^04) If /: >4 -> B,
                                                                                :                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                 EXAMPLE. Let R be a ring with identity and                                                9fft       the category of unitary left
      let       (?(/)              <2(/4) ->               be given by                                /(*). Then (2 is a covariant functor. Is                                            — S be the forgetful functor, which assigns to each module
                           :
                                                                                                                                                           R-modules. Let T     :   DTI        >

      Q representable?                                                                                                                                     its   underlying set. Then for each set                  X and module A, hom g (X, T{A))                                    is just   the set
                                                                                                                                                                         X — A. Let F S — be the functor that assigns to each X the free
                                                                                                                                                           of all functions         >                      :    *

10.   Let (A, a) and (B\ff) be representations of the covariant functors 5 C —> S and                                                   :
                                                                                                                                                           /^-module F(X) on the set X (see p. 182). Let x :X—> F(X) be the canonical map.i

      r e —> S respectively. If r :5 —> T is a natural transformation, then there is a
            :
                                                                                                                                                           For each set A' and module A, the map
      unique morphism f                        :   A—> AinQ such that the following diagram is commuta-
      tive for every object                        C of C                                                                                                                                 ax.A     :   Hom R (F(X),A) -> homs(^,r(^))
                                                                                                                                                           defined by g\-^gix is easily seen to be natural inland A. Since F(X) is free onA', ax a
                                                                            hom e(/4,C)                    5(C)                                                                                                                                                                                       .




                                                                                                                                                                      (Theorem IV.2.1 (iv)). Furthermore every function /
                                                                                                                                                           is injective                                                            * T(A) is of the                           :   X—
                                                       hom(/,l c )
                                                                                            j                 |
                                                                                                                  tc                                       form / = fix for a unique homomorphism / F(X) —> A (Theorem IV.2.1 (iv)). Con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




                                                                                                                                                           sequently a x a is surjective and hence a bijection. Therefore F is a left adjoint of T.
                                                                            hom e(B,C)—^T(C)                                                                               ,




                                                                                                                                                                 Other examples are given in the exercises.


                                                                                                                                                                 There is a close connection between adjoint pairs of functors and representable
                                                                                                                                                           functors.

2.    ADJOINT FUNCTORS
   Adjoint pairs of functors are defined and discussed. Although they occur in many                                                                        Proposition 2.2.         A covariant functor T                :   D — Q has a left adjoint if and only iffor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          >

branches of mathematics formal descriptions of them are relatively recent.                                                                                 each object C in C the functor hom e {C,T( — ))                            :       3D   — S s representable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *          i




      Let 5           :   C —* D and T             :   3D          — C be covariant functors. As observed in the dis-
                                                                    *                                                                                            PROOF. If 5 C -> £> is a left adjoint of T, then there is for each object C of C
                                                                                                                                                                                :



cussion preceding                    assignments (C,Z>) h> hom£>(5(C),Z)) and
                                         Theorem                    1.9,        the                                                                        and D of 2D a bijection
(/g)HbomaD (S(/),g) define a functor C X £> -> S which is contravariant in the
first variable             and covariant in the second. We denote this functor by hom£>(5(— ), — ).                                                                                       a c .D   :   homaD(5(C),Z>) -> hom c ( C,T(D)),
Similarly the functor hom e (-,r(-))                  C X £> -> S is defined by         :

                                                                                                                                                           which is natural in C and £>. Thus for a fixed C, (5(C),<*c.-) is a representation of the
                                   (C,Z))|->hom e (C,r(Z)))                                     and    (fg)   H hom (fT(g)).
                                                                                                                       e                                   functor hom e ( C,r(—)).
478                                  CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                                               2.    ADJOINT FUNCTORS                                       479



   Conversely suppose that for each C, A c is an object of £) that represents                                                                                                                 hom^(S (C)MC))
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2


home(C,7X-)). By Theorem 1.9 there is a covariant functor S C — 2D such that                    :               >


S(C) = A c and there is a natural isomorphism of functors
                                                                                                                                                           hom^C^C'))
                               homa)CS(-),-)                 — hom (-,7T-)).
                                                                         c

Therefore S is a left adjoint of T.             m                                                                                                                      Ag)



                                                                                                                                                                                       fc
Corollary 2.3.   A covariant functor T 2D —» C has a left adjoint if and only if there
                                                         :




exists for each object C ofG an object S(C) o/2D and amorphism uc C —» T(S(C))                              :




such that (S(C),uc)      is    a universal element of the functor hom e (C,T( — ))                                  :   2D   — S.
                                                                                                                              >
                                                                                                                                                           homviSiiQMC'))                                          hom c (C,re (C')).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2




      PROOF. Exercise; see Theorem 1.6.
                                                                                                                                    We must prove that the left rear rectangle is commutative. The top and bottom tri-
                                                                                                                                    angles are commutative by Corollary 1.7. The front and right rear rectangles are

Corollary 2.4. Any two left adjoint s of a covariant functor T                         :   2D       — (B are naturally
                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                    commutative since a and                            respectively are natural. Consequently

isomorphic.
                                                                                                                                                                   otcSi(g)fc>        = gacfc                   PcSitg) = a c fcS 2 (g).


      PROOF. If Si e — 2D and S
                     :         >            2   :       C — 2D are left adjoints of r, then there are                               Since         a c = etc    mo        is       injective   by hypothesis, we must have Si(g) fc = fcS 2 (g).
natural isomorphisms                                                                                                                Therefore the left rear rectangle is commutative.

                          a    :   homa>GSi( -),-)-> hom c ( - ,T( - )),
                          /3   :hom^(S 2 (-),-)->hom e (-,r(-)).                                                                                                                              EXERCISES
For each object C of C the objects S (C) and S (C) both represent the functor
                                                             X                2                                                             Note: S denotes the category of sets.
hom c (C,r( — )) by the first part of the proof of Proposition 2.2. Consequently for
each object C of C there is by Corollary 1 .7 an equivalence fc Si(C)                      :
                                                                                                                — S (C). We
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                    1 .     If   T C — S is a covariant functor that has a left adjoint, then T is representable.
                                                                                                                                                   :




need only show that fc is natural in C; that is, given a morphism g C                               :
                                                                                                                — O of (B we        2.      Let 6 be a concrete category and T              Q — S the forgetful functor. If T has a left
                                                                                                                                                                                                   :



must prove that                                                                                                                             adjoint F      :   S   — C, then Fis called a free-object functor and F(X) (X e S) is called a
                                                                                                                                            free F-object onX.
                                                                                                                                                 The category of groups has a free-object functor.
                                                                                                                                                 (a)
                                           5i(qJL«C)                                                                                             The category of commutative rings with identity and identity preserving
                                                                                                                                                 (b)

                                                                             S (g)
                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                            homomorphisms has a free-object functor. [If A' is finite, use Exercise III. 5. 11 to
                                                J                    J                                                                      define F(X).\
                                          Si(C')— S (C)          2

                                                                                                                                    3   .   Let * be a fixed set and define a functor S                    :   S -* S by Y h>    X X K. Then 5 is a left
                                                                                                                                            adjoint of the covariant horn functor h x = hom§(X,                         —   ).

is   commutative. We claim that it suffices to prove that
                                                                                                                                    4.      Let g be the category of groups, Q the category of abelian groups, ^ the category
                                                                                                                                            of fields, 2D the category of integral domains, 3U the category of unitary left
                                                h ° m(/cSl)                                                                                                                                                       K-K bimodules (K,R rings with
                 homa^CCWC'))                       <                    hom^CO A(C'»                                                       ^-modules, and              (B        the category of unitary
                                                                                                                                            identity).
             hom^fe),!)                                                              hom(S 2 (g),l)                                              In each of the following cases let T be the appropriate forgetful functor (for
                                                                                                                                            example, T  ^ — £) sends each field F to itself, considered as an integral domain).
                                                    77-r hom^WO A(C'»
                                                                                                                                                               :
                  hom^S,(C) A(C')) T
                                                hom(/c,l)                                                                                   Show that (S,T) is an adjoint pair.
                                                                                                                                              (a) T a  :
                                                                                                                                                          g, 5 Q      (2, where S(G) = G/G' with G' the commutator sub-
                                                                                                                                                                              :




is   commutative (where 1 = ls 2 (o)- For the image of l s ^o in one direction is                                                           group of G (Definition II.7.7).
                                                                                                                                              (b) r:^—>2D,S :2D—JF, where 5(D) is the field of quotients of D (Section III.4).
S 2 (g) fc and in the other direction fc ° Si(g).
      Consider the following three-dimensional diagram (in which 1 = ls 2 (c),                                                                (c) T    :   m
                                                                                                                                                           a, S a       971, where 5(^) = A:(x) z ^ (see Theorem IV.5.5).
                                                                                                                                                                                  :




oiX = ax,s 2 (C) and the induced map hom(&,l) is denoted k for simplicity):
                                                                                                                                              (d) r (B — >
                                                                                                                                                       :      S 911 — (B, where 5(M) = M(g) z R.
                                                                                                                                                                                  :
480                                  CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                     3.   MORPHISMS                                             481



3.       MORPHISMS                                                                                   / Z = g
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                     Z, then / = g by Exercise          III. 1.18.   Consequently the inclusion map

         A significant part of the elementary theory of categories is the attempt to general-        Z — Q is epic in the category of rings. But this map is obviously not surjective.
                                                                                                                  >



ize as many concepts as possible from well-known categories (for example, sets or
modules) to arbitrary categories. In this section we extend to (more or less) arbitrary
                                                                                                                  EXAMPLE. In the category of divisible abelian groups (p. 195) and group
                                                                                                     homomorphisms the canonical map t Q — Q/Z is monic, but clearly not injective.
categories the concepts of monomorphisms, epimorphisms, kernels and cokernels
                                                                                                                                                                   :.




of morphisms.
                                                                                                     To see this, suppose g,h A —> Q are homomorphisms with A divisible and irg = irh.
                                                                                                                                                :




                                                                                                     Ifgr^h, then there exist a e A, r,s e Z (s ^ ±1) such that g(a) — h(a) = r/s j± 0. By
                                                                                                     hypothesis rb = a for some be A. Consequently, r(g(b) — h(b)) = g(a) — h(d)
   NOTATION. Hereafter we shall usually denote the composite of two mor-
                                                                                                     = r(\/s\ whence g(b) - h(b) = 1/s. Therefore = Tg(b) - irh(b) = ir(g(b) - h(b))
phisms of a category by ^/instead of g ° /as previously.
                                                                                                     = 7r(l/s). Thus 1/seKer t = Z, which is a contradiction since      ±1. There-
                                                                                                     fore g = h and hence ir is monic.
         We begin by recalling that a morphism / C — D in a category is an equivalence
                                                            :      >


if and     only if there is a morphism g D — C such that gf = \c and fg — Id. This
                                                  :



definition is simply a reflection of the fact that a homomorphism in the category of
groups (or rings, or modules, etc.) is an isomorphism if and only if it has a two sided              Proposition 3.2. Let                       f   :   B — C and g C — D be morphisms of a category C.
                                                                                                                                                                        :      >


inverse (see Theorem 1.2.3). In a similar fashion we                    may extend the concepts of                    (i)    f and g monic =» gf monic;
monomorphisms and epimorphisms to arbitrary categories as follows.                                                (ii)       gf monic => f monic;
                                                                                                              (iii)          f and g epic => gf epic;
                                                                                                                  (iv)       gf epic => g epic;
Definition 3.1.        A morphism f C — D of a category Q is monic (or a monomor-
                                        :        >
                                                                                                                  (v) f is an equivalence => f is monic and epic.
phism) //
                                       fh = fg        =>        h = g                                         PROOF. Exercise.
for all objects B and morphisms g,h e hom(B,C). The morphism f is epic (or an epi-
morphism) if                                                                                                  REMARK. The two examples preceding Proposition 3.2 show that the converse
                                                                                                     of (v) is false.
                                        kf = tf       =>        k = t

for all objects E and morphisms k, t e hom(D,E).
                                                                                                              An object                 in a category C is said to be a zero object if               is   both universal and
                                                                                                     couniversal in e (see Definition 1.7.9). Thus for any object C of C there is a unique

      EXAMPLE. A morphism in the category of sets is monic [resp. epic] if and only                  morphism                        — C and a unique morphism C — 0.          >



if it is injective [resp. surjective]       (Exercise 1).
                                                                                                              EXAMPLE. The zero module is a zero object in the category of left modules
                                                                                                     over a ring; similarly for groups and rings. The category of sets has no zero objects.
    EXAMPLES. Let G be any one of the following categories: groups, rings, left
modules over a ring. If / C — > D and g,h :B — > C are homomorphisms (that is,
                                 :




morphisms of C), then by Exercise IV. 1 .2(a), fh = fg implies h = g if and only if /is
an injective homomorphism (that is, a monomorphism in the usual sense). 2 Thus the                   Proposition 3.3. Let C be a category andC an object of&.
categorical definition of monomorphism agrees with the previous definition in these
                                                                                                            Any two zero objects ofQ are equivalent.
                                                                                                                  (i)
familiar categories.
                                                                                                                is a zero object, then the unique morphism
                                                                                                              (ii)          If                                                                   -» C is monic and the
                                                                                                     unique morphism C —      is epic.
    EXAMPLES. Exercise IV.1.2(b) shows that a morphism /in the category of left
modules over a ring R is epic if and only if /is a surjective homomorphism (that is, an
epimorphism in the usual sense). The same fact is true in the category of groups, but
                                                                                                                  SKETCH OF PROOF, (i) Theorem 1.7.10. (ii) If c °/ = c og,                                           where
                                                                                                     0c       :     — C, then / = g by the couniversality of 0. Therefore C is monic.
                                                                                                                            >
the proof is more difficult (Exercise 2). Thus the categorical definition of epimor-
phism agrees with the previous definition in these two categories.

      EXAMPLES. In the category of rings every surjective homomorphism is easily                     Proposition 3.4. Let (B be a category which has a zero object 0. Then for each pair
seen to be epic. However, if fg              :   Q—    are homomorphisms of rings such that          C,D of objects ofQ there is a unique morphism Oc.d C —> D such that               :




                                                                                                                                              f © Oc.d     = Oc.e and          c ,d ° g =   b>   d
     2
         The Exercise deals only with modules, but the same argument is valid for groups and
rings.                                                                                               for all morphisms f e hom(D,E), g e hom(B,C).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :




482                                                                  CHAPTER X CATEGORIES                                                                                                                                                                                             3.   MORPHISMS                                        483


         REMARK.                       C .D is called a zero morphism.                                                                                                                                    By hypothesis there exist unique morphisms h A-^B and k :B —> A such
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ii)                                                                                                   :




                                                                                                                                                                                                  that     = and y'£ = / respectively. Consequently ihk = jk = i = i ° 1 B and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ih        y"


                                                                                                                                                                                                  y£/z = ih = y = y ° 1a. Since / and j are monomorphisms by (i), hk = 1 B and
                                                                                                f
         PROOF OF 3.4. (Uniqueness) If {0 CiD                                                           }       and {0 c .d} are two families of mor-
phisms with the stated properties, then for each pair C,D                                                                                                                                         £/z    = 1a. Therefore h is an equivalence.
                                                                         Oc,z>   = Od.dOc.d = Oc,z>.
                                        — A and t a A — be the unique                                                                                                                                    REMARK. Difference cokernels are epimorphisms and the dual of Proposition
         (Existence) For each object A of C let                                                     u       :        >                         :               >
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.6 (ii) holds for difference cokernels.
morphisms. For any fshom(D,E), fi D = E   -» £ by universality. For any                                     i    :




g e hom(5,C) xcg = ttb                              :       #—               by couniversality. Define                                     c ,d to be the composition

C™                        ZX Then for/s hom(A£), /oOc ,d= /idttc =                                                                    l   e tc =           Cf *    and similarly in                      Suppose that C is a category with a zero object                                                        and hence zero morphisms
the other case.                                                                                                                                                                                   (Proposition 3.4). A kernel of a morphism /: C — >                                                        D (if one exists) is defined to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                  any difference kernel of the pair (/,0c.z>); it is sometimes denoted Ker /. Definition
   The final step in extending properties of morphisms in familiar categories to mor-                                                                                                             3.5 and Propositions 3.4 and 3.6 show that k K — > C is a kernel of / C — > Z> if and             :                         :




phisms in arbitrary categories is to develop reasonable definitions of kernels and co-                                                                                                            only if
kernels of morphisms. We begin in a somewhat more general setting.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (i)   £ is a monomorphism with fk = ()*,£>; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ii)      if h      :   B — C is a morphism such that /7z =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >                                                          b ,d, then there is a unique mor-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  phism h :B — > # such that                  ^=                                  /z.


Definition 3.5. Let f                          :    C — D and g C — D be morphisms of a category C. A
                                                                                        :            >                                                                                            By Proposition 3.6 K is unique up to equivalence.
difference kernel (or equalizer) for the pair (f,g) is a                  morphism   B — C such that:                                              i       :             >




          (i)        fi   = gi;                                                                                                                                                                         A cokernel  D —> E of a morphism / C — D is defined dually as a difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /   :                                                  :       >

         (ii)        ifh       :   A—>Cisa morphism with fh = gh, then there exists a unique morphism                                                                                             cokernel of the pair (/,0c.z>); is sometimes denoted Coker f As above
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      it  is char-                                                  /

H    :   A — B such that iH = h.
                 >                                                                                                                                                                                acterized by the conditions
         A difference cokernel (or coequalizer) for the pair (f,g) is a morphism j                                                                                                     :   D— E
                                                                                                                                                                                             >


such that:                                                                                                                                                                                              (iii)      /   is an epimorphism with                                         // =   c ,e', and
         (iii)   jf       = jg;                                                                                                                                                                         (iv) if g         :      D — Fis a morphism such that g/=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >                                                          c ,f, then there is a unique mor-
         (iv)        ifk       :   D — F is a morphism with kf = kg, then there exists a unique morphism
                                       >                                                                                                                                                          phism g :E-+ F such that gt = g.
Ic   :   E —> F such that Icj = k.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXAMPLES. In the categories of groups, rings and modules, a kernel of the
         EXAMPLES. In the category S of sets a difference kernel of / C -> D and                                                                                             :

                                                                                                                                                                                                  morphism /   C — D is the inclusion map K—*C, where K is the usual kernel,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :


g    :   C -* D is the inclusion map B -* C, where # = c £ C f(c) = g(c) The same                                        (
                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                 j .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  K = {csC\ f(c) = 0). In the category of modules, the canonical epimorphism
construction shows that every pair of morphisms has a difference kernel in the cate-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  D — D/lm fis a cokernel of /.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "




gories of groups, rings, and modules respectively.


   EXAMPLE. Let / G — H and g G — H be homomorphisms of groups. Let
                                                :                    >                  :             >


W be the smallest normal subgroup of H containing f(a)g(a)~ \aeG}. Then the                                                       J
                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EXERCISES
canonical epimorphism H — H/Nis a difference cokernel of (/,g) by Theorem 1.5.6.
                                                                 >



                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 .   A morphism in the category of sets is monic [resp. epic] if and only if it is injective
                                                                                                                                                                                                        [resp. surjective].
Proposition 3.6. Let f                                  :       C — D aw/ g C — D
                                                                         »                  :               »            morphisms of a category C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.    A morphism / G —> Hin the category of groups is epic if and only if /is a sur-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :



         (i) B — C /j difference kernel o/(f,g),
                 Ifi       :                         i w « monomorphism.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        jective homomorphism (that is, an epimorphism in the usual sense). [Hint: If /is
   (ii) //i  B   C      A -* C are difference kernels of (f,g), then there is a unique
                          :                                 :
                                                                                                                                                                                                        epic, K = Im /, and j K — H is the inclusion map, then j is epic by Proposition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :       >

equivalence h A — B such that ih = j.
                                   :       >                                                                                                                                                            3.2. Show that /is surjective (that is, K — H) as follows. Let 5 be the set of left co-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        sets of K in H, let T = S U    w with w $ S. Let /4 be the group of all permutations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {       )



         PROOF, (i)                    Let     /z,          k    :   F— 5    >      be              morphisms                         such     that                /7z       = /£. Then                 of T. Let /         A be given by t(h)(h'K) = hh'K and t(h)(u) = u. Let s H—> A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :   H^                                                                                             :




/(/A) = (//)// = (g i)h = ^(//z). Since / is a difference kernel of (fg), there is a unique                                                                                                             be given by at(h)a, where a e A is the transposition interchanging u and         Show
morphism t F —> B such that it =
                               :            But both / =     and / = k satisfy this condi-
                                                                                 /7z.                                        /z                                                                         that s and / are homomorphisms such that sj = ry, whence s = t. Show that
tion, whence h = k by uniqueness. Therefore / is monic.                                                                                                                                                 hK= K for all                                /z   e H; therefore                K = H]
484                                    CHAPTER X CATEGORIES

3.    A commutative diagram



                                                   C   2
                                                           —n
     of morphisms of a category 6 is called a pullback for / and /2 if for every pair of
     morphisms hi B' —» Ci, /? 2
                           :
                                    —> C2 such that //h = /2/? 2 there exists a unique
                                         :
                                                                                                                                            List of Symbols
     morphism t :B' -*B such that hi = g r and // 2 = g2 t. L



             (a) If there is another pullback diagram for                      fu f with B in the upper left-hand
                                                                                     2            x



     corner, then B and Bi are equivalent.
             (b) In the pullback     diagram above, if /2 is a monomorphism, then so is g u
         (c)    Every pair of functions fi    :   d—            Z>,   /
                                                                      2   :   C — Z> in the category of sets has a
                                                                               2

     pullback.

4.   Show that every pair of functions /, # C — Z> has a difference cokernel in the
                                                                :




     category of sets.

5.   Let /, g      :   C —* Z> be morphisms of a category 6. For each X in C let
                                                                                                                              SYMBOL         MEANING                                     PAGE REFERENCE
                                Eq(*,/,g) =       {// e    hom(*,C)             |
                                                                                    ///   = gh\       .



                                                                                                                              Q              field of rational numbers                                  1

         (a)Eq( — ,/,#) is a contravariant functor from 6 to the category of sets.                                            R              field of real numbers                                      1

        (b) A morphism / K —> C is a difference kernel of ( /,g) if and only if Eq( - f,g)
                                 :                                                                                     ,

                                                                                                                              C              field of complex     numbers                               1
     is representable with representing object K (that is, there is a natural isomorphism
                                                                                                                              =>             implies                                                    1
     r hom e (-,ZO -» Eq(-,/,g)). [///«/: show that for h :X-^K, rx (h) = ih, where
         :




     /   = tk {\k).]                                                                                                                         if   and only if                                           1


                                                                                                                                                  an element of                                         2
6.   If each square in the following diagram is a pullback and B'                                         — B is a monomor-   e              is

                                                                                                                                             is not    an element of                                    2
                                                                                           See Exercise 3.]                   {
     phism, then the outer rectangle is a pullback.
                                                                                                                              \x      |
                                                                                                                                             the class of all x such that P(x) is true                  2

                                                                                                                              C              is    a subclass (or subset) of                            2

                                                                                                                                             empty set                                                  3

                                                                                                                              P(^) or 2 A    power set of A                                             3

                                                                                                                                             union of the sets ^»                                       3
                                                                                                                              (J ^,
7.   In a category with a zero object, the kernel of a monomorphism is a zero mor-
     phism.                                                                                                                                  intersection of the sets Ai                                3
                                                                                                                              p| Ai
                                                                                                                              ui
                                                                                                                              B — A          relative complement of A in       B                        3

                                                                                                                              A'             complement of A                                            3

                                                                                                                              f: A-^B        /is a function from A to B                                 3

                                                                                                                              a H> /(a)      the function / maps a to f{a)                              3

                                                                                                                              /| 5           restriction of the function /to S                          4

                                                                                                                                             [identity function on the set A                            4
                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                             { identity   element of the ring A                      115

                                                                                                                                             [composite function of /and g                              4
                                                                                                                              g ° J or gj         com p OS j te morphism of / and g                   52
                                                                                                                                             I

                                                                                                                              Im /           image of the function /                                4, 31

                                                                                                                              f-\T)          inverse image of the set T                                 4

                                                                                                                                                                       485
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8




486                                              LIST OF SYMBOLS                                                                                                                            LIST OF   SYMBOLS                       487


SYMBOL                         MEANING                                                                             PAGE REFERENCE       SYMBOL                             MEANING                                    PAGE REFERENCE
                                    Cartesian product of sets A and B                                                               6   sgn r                              sign of the permutation r                                48
A XB                            |

                                                                                                      B
                                    direct product of groups A and                                                                 26
                                1
                                                                                                                                        An                                 alternating group on n letters                           49
                                    is    equivalent to                                                                             6   Dn                                 dihedral group of degree n                                50
                                    is    equipollent with                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                 Ai                        disjoint union of the sets Ai                            58
                               equivalence class of a                                                                               6   ui

                                    (Cartesian) product of the sets Ai                                    ;                         7   n^Gi                               weak direct product of the groups G»                     60
                                                                                                                                        ui
                                    product of the family of objects                                  {
                                                                                                          A,-\ i e 1}              53
                                                                                                                                                 Gi                        direct sum of the groups (or modules) Gi             60, 173
UI                                  direct product of the family of groups                                                              ui
                                    [or rings or modules]      {
                                                                   A   {       \
                                                                                       i   e 1}                          59, 130, 173   II* Gi                             free product of the groups Gi                            68
                                                                                                                                        ui
Z                              set of integers                                                                                      9
                                                                                                                                        G[m]                               {ueG\mu = 0}                                         77,224
N                              set of nonnegative integers (natural numbers)                                                        9
                                                                                                                                        G(p)                               [u eG    |
                                                                                                                                                                                        u has order a power of p\               77,222
N*                             set of positive integers                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                        G    t                             torsion subgroup [submodule] of G                    78, 220
a\b                            a divides b                                                                                    11, 135
                                                                                                                                        Gx                                 stabilizer of x                                           89
aJrb                           a does not divide b                                                                            11, 135

                         On)        greatest common divisor of a u                                .       .       an               11
                                                                                                                                        CH (x)                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                           centralizer of x in                                       89
                                                                                                                                        NH(K)
                                                                                                      .



                                                                                                                                                                           normalizer of K in H
             .   .   ,                                                                                        ,
                               |

                                [ideal generated by a u        .   .       .               an                                    123                                                                                                89
                                                                                   ,




a   = b (mod m)                a is congruent to b modulo m                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                        C(G)                               center of G                                              91

                               (cardinal number of the set A                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                        Cn(G)                              rt-th term of ascending central series                  100
                                    order of the group A                                                                          24    G'                                 commutator subgroup of G                                102
                                    determinant of the matrix A                                                                  351    GM                                 Az-th   derived subgroup of G                           102
                               aleph-naught                                                                                        16   End A                              endomorphism ring of A                                  116
ZV                             group of symmetries of the square                                                                  26
                                                                                                                                                                           binomial coefficient                                    1 1
                               symmetric group on n letters                                                                       26    (^j
         H                     direct sum of additive groups                                G and H                               26    char/?                             characteristic of the ring R                            119
Zm                             integers modulo        m                                                                           21    R   op
                                                                                                                                                                           opposite ring of R                                  122, 330

Q/z                            group of rationals modulo one                                                                      27    (X)                                ideal generated by the set     X                        123
Z(p°°)                         Sylow p-subgroup of Q/Z                                                                         30, 37   (a)                                principal ideal generated by a                          123
                               is isomorphic to                                                                                   30    S~ R l
                                                                                                                                                                           ring of quotients of R by S                             143
Ker/                           kernel of the homomorphism /                                                              31, 119, 170   RP                                 localization of R at P                                  147
H< G                           H     is   a subgroup of G                                                                         31    R[x]                               ring of polynomials over R                              149
<X>                            subgroup generated by the set X                                                                    32    R[x u     •   •   •   ,   xn   ]   ring of polynomials in n indeterminates over R          151
<a>                            cyclic (sub)group generated by a                                                                   32    R[[x]]                             ring of formal power series over R                      154
H V K,H+K                      the join of subgroups          H and K                                                             33    deg /                              degree of the polynomial /                         157, 158
Qs                             quaternion group                                                                                   33    C(/)                               content of the polynomial /                             162
\a\                            order of the element a                                                                             35    Hom R (A,B)                        set of all /^-module homomorphisms       A —> B         174
a = r b (mod H)                ab~ l e      H                                                                                     37    dim D V                            dimension of the D-vector space V                       185
a =ib (mod H)                  a~ l b e     H                                                                                     37    rA s                               R-S bimodule A                                          202
Ha, aH                         right and left cosets of a                                                                         38    rA,[A r       ]                    left [resp. right]   ^-module A                         202
[G:H]                          index of a subgroup           H in a group G                                                       38    A*                                 dual module of A                                        203
HK                             {ab\aeH,beK}                                                                                       39    <a,f>                              f(a)                                                    204
N<\ G                          N    is    a normal subgroup of G                                                                  41
                                                                                                                                         a                                 Kronecker delta                                         204
G/N                            factor group of G by AT                                                                            42    ^\l(A,B)                           category of middle linear maps on A X B                 207
488                                                  LIST OF SYMBOLS


SYMBOL                              MEANING                                                       PAGE REFERENCE
A (x)a B                            tensor product of modules A and B                                         208

/® g                                induced map on the tensor product                                         209
Qa                                  order ideal of a                                                          220
[F.AT]                              dimension of field Fas a K- vector space                                  231

K[u u        •   •   •
                        «J,
                         ,
                                    subring generated by       # and «,,...,«„ [resp. A]                      232
                     K[X]]
K(u u
         [resp.

             .   .   .
                         ,
                             un)    subfield generated by          K and u u     .   .   .   ,   un                                              Bibliography
         [resp.      K(X)}               [resp. *]                                                            232
                             x n)   field of rational functions in n indeterminates                           233          All books and articles actually referred to in the text are listed below. The list also
#Oi,         .   .   .   ,


                                                                                                                      includes a number of other books that may prove to be useful references. No attempt
AuUF                                Galois group of F over K                                                  243
                                                                                                                     has been made to make the list complete. It contains only a reasonable selection of
A                                   discriminant of a polynomial                                              270
                                                                                                                     English language books in algebra and related areas. Almost all of these books are
F?
         n
                                    \u*
                                          n
                                              \ueF\ char F = p]                                               285
                                                                                                                     accessible to anyone able to read this text, though in some cases certain parts of this
[F:K] S                             separable degree of F over K                                              285    text are prerequisites.

[F:K]i                              inseparable degree of F over K                                            285      For the reader's convenience the books are classified by topic. However, this
Nk f (u)                            norm of w                                                                 289                                    For instance, several books classified as "general"
                                                                                                                     classification is not a rigid one.
                                                                                                                     contain a fairly complete treatment of group theory as well as fields and Galois
TK F (u)                            trace of w                                                                289
                                                                                                                     theory. Other books, such as [26] and [39], readily fit into more than one classifica-
g n (x)                             n-th cyclotomic polynomial                                                 298
                                                                                                                     tion.
tr.d,        F/K                    transcendence degree of F over K                                           316

K *n  ll
                                    {ueC\u^eK\                                                                 320
KUp™                                {u e C u*» e K for some
                                               |
                                                                     a*   > 0|                                 320
                                                                                                                     BOOKS
/„                                  n X n identity matrix                                                      328

MslUR                               ring of n      X n matrices over R                                         328   GENERAL
A    1
                                    transpose of the matrix A                                                  328
                                                                                                                       1.    Chevalley, C, Fundamental Concepts of Algebra. New York: Academic Press,
A~       Y
                                    inverse of the invertible matrix A                                         331
                                                                                                                             Inc., 1956.
E? ,m                               a certain matrix                                                           337    2.     Faith, C, Algebra: Rings, Modules and Categories I. Berlin: Springer- Verlag,
Aa                                  classical adjoint of the matrix A                                         353            1973.

                                    minimal polynomial of                [resp. A]                             356    3.     Goldhaber, J. and G. Ehrlich, Algebra. New York: The Macmillan Compa-
q<p(x), q A (x)                                                    <j>

                                                                                                                             ny, 1970.
Tr A                                trace of the matrix A                                                      369
                                                                                                                      4.     Herstein, I., Topics in Algebra. Waltham, Mass. Blaisdell Publishing Company,
                                                                                                                                                                               :


Rad /                               radical of the ideal /                                                     379
                                                                                                                             1964.
V(S)                                affine variety determined by S                                            409            Lang,         Algebra. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, Publishing Company,
                                                                                                                      5.             S.,

a(B)                                left annihilator of    B                                                  417            Inc., 1965.

r o a                               r   + a + ra                                                              426     6.     MacLane, S. and G. Birkhoff, Algebra. New York: The Macmillan Company,
                                                                                                                             1967.
J(R)                                Jacobson radical of R                                                     426
                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                      7.     Van der Waerden, B. L., Algebra. (7th ed., 2 vols.), New York: Frederick
P(R)                                prime radical of R
                                                                                                                             Ungar Publishing Co., 1970.
homO*,i9) or                        set of morphisms      A — 5 in a category e
                                                               >                                           52, 465

         hom e (/*,i9)                                                                                               SET THEORY
/za                                 covariant horn functor                                                    465

hB                                  contravariant horn functor                                                466     8.     Eisenberg, M., Axiomatic Theory of Sets and Classes.           New York:      Holt,
                                                                                                                             Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1971.
QT                                  category formed from Q and T                                              470
                                                                                                                      9.     Halmos, P., Naive Set Theory, Princeton, N. J.: D. Van Nostrand Company
 c ,d                               zero morphism from C to               D                                   482
                                                                                                                             Inc., 1960.
                                                                                                                     10.     Suppes, P., Axiomatic Set Theory. Princeton, N. J.: D. Van Nostrand Com-
                                                                                                                             pany, Inc., 1960.

                                                                                                                                                                  489
490                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY                                 491



GROUPS                                                                                        FIELDS

11.   Curtis, C. W. and I. Reiner, Representation Theory of Finite Groups and Asso-           36.   Artin,   E.,    Galois Theory.   Notre Dame, Ind.: Notre Dame Mathematical
      ciative Algebras.       New York: Interscience Publishers, 1962.                              Lectures No. 2 (2d ed.), 1944.
12.   Dixon, J., Problems in Group Theory. Waltham, Mass.: Blaisdell Publishing               37.   Gaal, L., Classical Galois Theory with Examples. Chicago: Markham, 1971.
      Company, 1967.                                                                          38.   Jacobson, N., Lectures in Abstract Algebra (vol. III). Princeton, N. J.: D. Van
13.   Fuchs, L., Infinite Abelian Groups. New York: Academic Press, Inc., 1970.                     Nostrand Company, Inc., 1964.
14.   Gorenstein, D., Finite Groups. New York: Harper and Row, Publishers, 1968.              39.   Kaplansky, I., Fields and Rings (2d        ed.).   Chicago: University of Chicago
15.   Hall, M., The Theory of Groups. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1959.                        Press, 1972.

16.   Hall, M. and J. K. Senior, The Groups of Order 2 n (n < 6). New York: The               40.   McCarthy, P. J., Algebraic Extensions of Fields. Waltham, Mass.: Blaisdell
      Macmillan Company, 1964.                                                                      Publishing Company, 1966.
17.   Kaplansky, I., Infinite Abelian Groups (2d ed.), Ann Arbor, Mich.: University
      of Michigan Press, 1969.                                                                LINEAR AND MULTILINEAR ALGEBRA
18.   Kurosh, A. G., The Theory of Groups (2 vols.), New York: Chelsea Publishing
                                                                                              41.   Greub, W., Linear Algebra (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1967.
      Company, 1960.
                                                                                              42.   Greub, W., Multilinear Algebra. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1967.
19.   Rotman, J., The Theory of Groups (2d ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc.,
                                                                                              43.   Halmos, P. R., Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces (2d ed.). Princeton, N. J.:
      1973.
                                                                                                    D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1958.
20.   Scott, W. R., Group Theory. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1964.
                                                                                              44.   Jacobson, N., Lectures in Abstract Algebra (vol. II). Princeton, N. J.: D. Van
21.   Zassenhaus, H., The Theory of Groups. New York: Chelsea Publishing Com-
                                                                                                    Nostrand Company, Inc., 1953.
      pany, 1958.

RINGS AND MODULES                                                                             CATEGORIES
22.   Divinsky, N.      J.,   Rings and Radicals. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,       45.   MacLane, S., Categories for the Working Mathematician. Berlin: Springer-
      1965.                                                                                         Verlag, 1972.
23.   Gray, M., A Radical Approach to Algebra. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley                 46.   Mitchell, B., Theory of Categories. New York: Academic Press, Inc., 1965.
      Publishing Company, Inc., 1970.                                                         47.   Pareigis, B., Categories and Functors.     New York: Academic Press, Inc., 1970.
24.   Herstein, I. N., Noncommutative Rings. Math. Assoc. of America, distributed
      by J. Wiley, 1968.                                                                      NUMBER THEORY
25.   Jacobson N., Structure of Rings. Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Publ., vol. 37, 1964.
                                                                                              48.   Artin E., Algebraic Numbers and Algebraic Functions. New York: Gordon and
26.   Jans, J., Rings and Homology. New York: Holt, Rinehart             and Winston, Inc.,
                                                                                                    Breach, 1967.
      1964.
                                                                                              49.   Lang, S., Algebraic Number Theory. Reading Mass.: Addison-Wesley Pub-
27.   Lambek, J., Lectures on Rings and Modules. Waltham, Mass.: Blaisdell Pub-
                                                                                                    lishing Company, Inc., 1970.
      lishing Company, 1966.
                                                                                              50.   O'Meara, O.       T., Introduction to   Quadratic Forms. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
28.   McCoy, N., Theory of Rings. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1964.
                                                                                                    1963.
29.   Northcott, D. G., Lessons on Rings, Modules and Multiplicity. New York:
                                                                                              51.   Shockley, J. E., Introduction to Number Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
      Cambridge University Press, 1968.
                                                                                                    Winston, Inc., 1967.
                                                                                              52.   Weiss E., Algebraic Number Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill Inc., 1963.
COMMUTATIVE ALGEBRA
30.   Atiyah,   M. F. and I. G. MacDonald, Introduction to Commutative Algebra.               ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY
      Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., 1969.
      Kaplansky, I., Commutative Rings. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 1970.                  53.   Fulton, W., An Introduction to Algebraic Geometry. New York: W. A. Benja-
31.
32.   Larsen, M. and P. J. McCarthy, Multiplicative Theory of Ideals. New York:
                                                                                                    min Inc., 1969.
      Academic Press, Inc., 1971.                                                             54.   Lang, S., Introduction to Algebraic Geometry. New York: Interscience Pub-
                                                                                                    lishers, 1959.
33.   Zariski, O. and P. Samuel, Commutative Algebra (vols. I and II). Princeton
      N. J., D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1958. 1960.                                       55.   MacDonald, I. G., Algebraic Geometry: Introduction to Schemes. New York:
                                                                                                    W. A. Benjamin Inc., 1968.
HOMOLOGICAL ALGEBRA
                                                                                              ANALYSIS
34.   Hilton, P.   J.   and U. Stammbach, A Course in Homological Algebra. Berlin:
      Springer-Verlag, 1971.                                                                  56.   Burrill, C.    W., Foundations of Real Numbers. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.,
35.   S.   MacLane, Homology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1963.                                        1967.
                                                                                                                 —                              3     —      3




492                                BIBLIOGRAPHY

57.   Hewitt, E. and K. Stromberg, Real and Abstract Analysis. Berlin: Springer-
      Verlag, 1969.



ARTICLES AND NOTES
58.   Bergman, G., "A Ring Primitive on the Right but Not on the Left," Proc.
      Amer. Math. Soc, 15 (1964), pp. 473-475; correction, pg. 1000.
59.   Cohen, P. J., Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis, New York: W. A.
      Benjamin Inc., 1966.
                                                                                                                            Index
      Corner, A. L. S., "On a Conjecture of Pierce Concerning Direct Decomposition
60.
      of Abelian Groups," Proc. Colloq. on Abelian Groups, Budapest, 1964, pp.
                                                                                        A. C. C. see ascending            —multilinear function                  bijective function 5
                                                                                            chain condition                    349                               bilinear map 211, 349
      43-48.
                                                                                        Abel's Theorem 308              annihilator 206, 388,417                   canonical   — 211
61.   Feit, W. and J. Thompson, "Solvability of Groups of    Odd Order," Pac. Jour.     abelian field extension 292     anti-isomorphism 330                     bimodule 202
      Math., 13 (1963), pp. 775-1029.                                                   abelian group 24                antisymmetric relation 1                 binary operation 24
62.   Goldie, A. W., "Semiprime rings with maximum condition," Proc. Lond. Math.          —defined by generators        Aitin, E. vi, 251,252,288                  closed under a   — 31
      Soc, 10(1960), pp. 201-220.                                                          and relations 343ff          Artinian                                 binomial
63.   Kaplansky, I., "Projective Modules," Math. Ann., 68 (1958), pp. 372-377.                   — 195ff
                                                                                          divisible                       left   —algebras 451                     —          118
                                                                                                                                                                     coefficient

      Krull, W., "Galoissche Theorie der unendlichen algebraischen Erweiterungen,"
                                                                                                generated — 76ff
                                                                                          finitely                        —module 372ff                            —theorem 118
64.
      Math. Ann., 100 (1928), pp. 687-698.
                                                                                          free— 71ff                      —rings       372ff, 419ff,             Boolean ring 120
                                                                                        action of group on set 88ff            435ff                             bound
      Procesi, C. and L. Small, "On a theorem of Goldie," Jour, of Algebra, 2 (1965),
65.
                                                                                        additive notation for           ascending                                  (greatest) lower  — 14
      pp. 80-84.                                                                            groups 25, 29, 38, 70         —central       100
                                                                                                                                         series                    least upper    — 14
66.   Sasiada, E. and P. M. Cohn, "An Example of a Simple Radical Ring," Jour, of       adjoining a root 236              —chain condition           83,           upper   — 13
      Algebra, 5 (1967), pp. 373-377.                                                   adjoint                                372ff
                                                                                          —associativity 214            associate 135                            cancellation 24, 116
                                                                                                 —matrix 353
                                                                                          classical                     associated prime ideal 380,              canonical
                                                                                          —pair of functors 477ff              387                                 —bilinear map 211
                                                                                        affine variety 409              associative                                —epimorphism 43, 125,
                                                                                        algebra(s) 226ff, 450ff           —binary operation 24                       172
                                                                                          division   — 456ff              generalized — law 28                     —forms 337
                                                                                          Fundamental Theorem           AuUF 243                                   —injection 60, 130, 173
                                                                                            of— 266                     automorphism 30, 119                       Jordan — form 361
                                                                                          group— 227                      extendible— 251, 260                     —middle         map 209
                                                                                                                                                                               linear
                                                                                          homomorphism of                 inner— 91,459                            primary rational —form
                                                                                            228                           ^-automorphism 243                         361
                                                                                          —ideal 228                      —of a group           30, 90             —projection 59, 130, 173
                                                                                          left Artinian   — 451         axiom                                      rational  —
                                                                                                                                                                            form 360
                                                                                          tensor product of   — 229       —of choice        1                    Cardan's formulas 310
                                                                                        algebraic                         —of class formation 2                  cardinal number(s) 16ff
                                                                                          —algebra 453                    —of extensionality 2                     exponentiation of    —
                                                                                                                                                                                        22
                                                                                          —closure 259ff                  —of pair formation 6                     —inequalities 17
                                                                                          —element 233, 453               power —       3                          product of— 16
                                                                                          — extension 233ff
                                                                                            field                                                                  sum of   — 16
                                                                                          —number 242                   Baer lower radical 444ff                   trichotomy law for   — 18
                                                                                          —set 409                      base                                     cardinality 16
                                                                                        algebraically                     transcendence         — 313ff          Cartesian product 6, 7ff
                                                                                          —closed field 258             basis 71, 181                            category 52ff, 464ff
                                                                                          —(in)dependent       31 Iff     dual— 204                                concrete 55
                                                                                        algorithm                         Hilbert—Theorem 391                      dual— 466
                                                                                          division —    158
                                                                                                        11,               matrix relative to a                     opposite— 466
                                                                                          Euclidean — 141                      329ff                               product — 467
                                                                                        alternating                       standard     — 336                     Cauchy's Theorem 93
                                                                                          —group 49                       transcendence    —        31 3ff       Cayley's Theorem 90


                                                                                                                                        493
                                                           3                              —                                             —     ,                               —                                   ———

494                                          INDEX                                                                                                              INDEX                                                 495


Cayley-Hamilton Theorem          column                         correspondence                      difference                                    eigenvectors 367ff              even permutation 48
      367, 369                     elementary    —operation       Galois— 246                         —kernel 482                                 Eisenstein's Criterion 164      exact sequence 175ff
center                               338                        coset 38ff                            —cokernel 482                               elementary                         short— 176
  —of a group 34, 91               —rank 336                      complete set of                   dihedral group 50                               —column operation 338            split— 177
  —of a ring 22  1                 —space 336                        representatives 39             dimension 185ff                                 —divisors 80, 225, 357,       exponentiation
central                            —vector 333                  couniversal object 57                        — 245
                                                                                                      relative                                          361                          — a group 28
                                                                                                                                                                                       in
   ascending —     100
                 series          commutative                    covariant                             invariant —property 185                       —Jordan matrix 359               —of cardinal numbers
  —idempotents 135                 — binary operation 24          —functor 465                      direct                                          —row operation 338                 22
  —simple division                 —diagram 4                     —horn functor 465                   —factor 63                                    —symmetric functions          extendible  automorphism
      algebra 456                  generalized — law 28         Cramer's Rule 354                     —product 26, 59ff, 130,                        252                               251,260
centralizer 89                     —group 24                    cubic                                      131, 173                                 —transformation matrix        extension field 23 Iff
chain 13                           —ring 115                      resolvant — 272                     —sum 60, 62ff, 173, 175                           338                          abelian— 292
chain conditions 83ff, 372fT     commutator 102                 cycles 46                             —sum of matrices 360                        embedded prime 384                 algebraic— 233ff
                                   —subgroup 102                  disjoint — 47                       —summand 437        63,                     embedding 1 19                     cyclic— 289ff, 292
char R 119
characteristic
                                 companion matrix 358           Conway, C. T., xiii                 discriminant 270                              empty                              cyclotomic       — 297ff
  — of a ring 119                comparable elements 1          cyclic                              discrete valuation ring 404                     —set 3                           finitely generated    — 231
  —polynomial 366ff              complement 3                     — extension 289ff
                                                                     field                          disjoint                                        — word 64                        Galois— 245
  — vectors 367                  complete                         —group       32, 35ff               linearly   —subfields 318ff                 End A 116                          normal     — 264ff
  —values 367                      —       sum 59
                                      direct                      —module          171                —permutations 47                            endomorphism(s)                    purely inseparable

  —space 368                       —lattice 15                    —subspace 356                       —    sets 3                                   characteristic                     282ff

  —subgroups 103                   —ring of quotients 144       cyclotomic                            — union 58                                        polynomial of an             purely transcendental
                                   — of coset
                                      set                         —extension 297ff                  divisible group 195ff                               366ff                          314
Chinese Remainder
      Theorem 131
                                      representatives 39          —polynomial 166, 298              division                                        dense ring of     — 418          radical— 303ff
                                 completely reducible
                                                                D. C. C. — see descending
                                                                                                      —algebras 227, 456ff                          determinant of an    — 354       separable— 261, 282ff,
choice                                module 437
                                                                               ,
                                                                                                      —algorithm 11, 158                            matrix of an— 329ff, 333           324
  axiom of    — 13               composite
                                                                     chain condition
                                                                                                          —
                                                                                                      finite ring 462                               nilpotent  — 84                  separably generated
  —function 15                     —function 4                  Dedekind domain 401 ff                —ring 116                                     normal    —85                      322
class 2ff                          —functor 468                 degree
                                                                  —of a element 234
                                                                                                    divisor(s)                                      —  of a group 30                 simple   — 232
  axiom of    —formation 2         — morphism 52                             field
                                                                                                      elementary—           80,         225,        —ring 116, 179,415              transcendental           — 233,
  —equation 90, 91                 —subfield 233                  —of inseparability 285ff                 357, 361                                 trace of an   —369                 31 Iff
  equivalence — 6                composition series 108, 375
                                                                  — of a polynomial 157,              greatest common               —   1 1       epic morphism 480               extension
  proper — 2                     concrete category 55
                                                                    158                                    140                                    epimorphism, 30, 118, 170         integral       — 395
  quotient — 6                                                    transcendence — 316                     — 116
                                 congruence                                                           zero                                          canonical— 43, 125, 172         —of an         ideal 145
classical adjoint 353              — modulo m 12                delta                               domain                                          —  in a category 480            —ring 394ff
classification of finite           —modulo a subgroup 37          Kronecker        — 204              Euclidean — 139                             equality 2                      extensionality
  groups 96fT                      —relation 27                 DeMorgan's Laws 3                     integral— 16    1                           equalizer 482                     axiom of        —2
closed                           conjugacy class 89             dense ring 418                        —of a function            3                 equation(s)                     external
  — intermediate     field 247   conjugate elements or          Density Theorem 420                   principal     — 123
                                                                                                                    ideal                           general —of degree n            —     sum
                                                                                                                                                                                       direct     173       60,

  —object 410                         subgroups 89              denumerable set 16                    Priifer— 409                                    308ff                         —     product 130
                                                                                                                                                                                       direct

  —subgroups 247                 conjugation 88                                                       valuation — 409                               linear — 346                    —weak      product 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                   direct
                                                                dependence
  —under a binary                constant                         algebraic    —     3 1 1 ff
                                                                                                      unique factorization                        equipollent sets 15

      operation 31                 — polynomial 150               linear   — 181                           137                                    equivalence                     factor group 42ff

closure                            —term 150, 154               derivative 161
                                                                                                    double dual 205                                 — 6
                                                                                                                                                      class                       factorization

          — 259fT
  algebraic                      constructible number 239       derived subgroup 102
                                                                                                    dual                                            — a category 53
                                                                                                                                                      in                            — commutative rings
                                                                                                                                                                                       in

         — 397
  integral
                                                                                                      —basis 204                                    natural — 468                    135ff

  normal — 265
                                 content of a polynomial
                                      162
                                                                descending chain condition            —category 466                                 — relation6                     — polynomial rings
                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                     83, 372ff                        double— 205                                 equivalent                           157ff
codomain 3                       Continuum Hypothesis 17        determinant 35 Iff                    —map 204                                      — matrices 332, 335fT           unique     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                    factorization
coequalizer 482                  contraction of an ideal 146,     expansion of a         —along a     —module 203ff                                 — series 109,375                   137ff
cofactor 352                         398                            row 353                           —statement 54                               Euclidean                       factors
Cohen, I. S. 388                 contravariant                    —of an endomorphism               echelon                                         —algorithm 141                  invariant— 80, 225, 357,
coimage 176                        —functor 466                     354                               reduced row — form 346                        —ring 139                          361
cokernel 176                       —horn functor 466            diagonal matrix 328                                                               Euler function 297                —of a series 107, 375
          — 482
  difference                     coordinate ring 413            diagram                             eigenspace 368                                evaluation homomorphism         faithful module 418
  —of a morphism 483             coproduct 54ff                   commutative         —4            eigenvalues 367ff                                 153                         field 116, 230ff
                                    1   ——                      5       —      ,                                 ——    ,                          8             —

496                                                        INDEX                                                                                                                     INDEX                                                    497



   algebraically closed                      fully invariant subgroup                —multiplicative system                   —of rationals modulo                       left quasi-regular— 426               integral

        258                                       103                                  449                                     one 27                                    maximal  — 127ff                        —closure 397
   —extension 23              Iff            function(s) 3ff                       generators     and      relations
                                                                                                                              —of small order 98                         nil— 430                                —domain 116
   finite— 278ff, 462                                  —5
                                               bijective
                                                                                                                                     of symmetries of the                nilpotent — 430                         —element 395
   fixed— 245                                  bilinear— 211, 349
                                                                                       67ff, 343ff
                                                                                                                                square 26                                order— 220                              —ring extension 395
                                                                                                                                                                         primary — 380ff
                                                                                   generators
   intermediate           — 23                 choice —     1
                                                                                     —of a group 32
                                                                                                                              /7-group 93                                                                      integrally closed ring 397

   —of rational functions                      fieldof rational — 233
                                                                                     —of an                                      quaternion           —   33, 97, 99     prime—          377ff
                                                                                                                                                                                      126ff,                   intermediate field 231
                                                                                                 123
                                                                                                ideal                                                                    primitive — 425                                   —
                                               graph of a — 6
        233                                                                                                                   reduced— 198                                                                       closed  247
   perfect— 289                                        —4
                                               injective
                                                                                     —of a module 171                         —ring 117                                  principal — ring 123                    stable— 250
   splitting— 257ff                                                                Going-up Theorem 399                       simple — 49                                proper — 123                          intermediate value theorem
                                               leftor right inverse of a
finite dimensional                               —5                                Goldie                                     solvable—        108
                                                                                                                                             102ff,                      regular    — 417
                                                                                                                                                                                     left                            167

   —algebra 227                                                                      —ring 447ff                              symmetric — 26, 46ff
                                               Moebius — 301                                                                                                           idempotent                              internal

   — extension 231
        field                                  multilinear — 349ff
                                                                                     — Theorem 448
                                                                                        's
                                                                                                                              torsion — 78                               —element 135, 437                       —        product 131
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     direct

   —vector space 186                           surjective—          5              Goldmann ring 400                          weak direct product of                     orthogonal         — 135, 439
                                                                                                                                                                                               s                 —        sum 62, 175
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     direct

finite field 278ff, 462                        symmetric rational                  graph 6                                      60, 62                                 identity 24, 115                          —weak         product 62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              direct

finite group 24, 92ff, 96ff                       252ff                            greatest                                                                              —function 4                           Interpolation

finite set      16                             two sided inverse of a         —      —common        divisor      1 1
                                                                                                                           Hall's Theorem 104                            —functor 465                            Lagrange's — Formula,
finitely generated                                5                                   140                                  Halmos, P. ix                                 —matrix 328                                 166

  —abelian groups                   76ff,    functor 465ff                           —lower bound         14               -Hamilton                                   image                                   intersection 3

    343ff                                      adjoint— 477ff                      group(s) 24ff                              Cay ley   —Theorem 367,                    inverse —   31   4,                   invariant

  —extension      232     field                composite    —468                     abelian— 24, 70ff, 76ff                    369                                      —of a function 4                        —dimension property
  —group 32                                    forgetful   —
                                                           466                       —algebra 227                          Hilbert                                       —of a homomorphism                          185
  —ideal 123                                   free object  —479                     alternating — 49                         — Basis Theorem 391                           31, 119,170                          —factors 80, 225, 357,
  —module 171                                  horn    —
                                                       465, 466                      center of a —    9134,                   —Nullstellensatz 409ff,                    —of a 4    set                              361

        isomorphism theorem                                         — 470ff          cyclic—    32, 35ff                       412                                     inclusion map 4                           —subspace 356
first

        44, 126, 172
                                               representable
                                                                                     —defined by generators                   — Theorem 90 292
                                                                                                                                's                                     indecomposable group 83                 inverse 24, 116
                                             Fundamental Theorem
Fitting's       Lemma 84                       —of Algebra 265ff                       and relations 67, 343ff             -Holder                                     independence                              —image 31     4,

five    lemma 180                              —of Arithmetic 12                     dihedral— 50                             Jordan    —Theorem 111,                    algebraic    — 31         Iff           —of a matrix 331
                                                                                                               — 26,            375                                      linear— 74, 181                         two sided —of a function
   short— 176                                  —of Galois Theory                     direct product of
                                                                                        59ff                               Hom^A.B) 174, 199ff                         independent                                   5
fixed field 245                                   245ff, 263
forgetful functor 466                                                                direct sum of      — 60, 62           horn functor 465, 466                         set of ideals 446                     invertible

form
                                                                                     divisible— 195ff                      homogeneous                                 indeterminate 150, 152                    —element 116
  Jordan canonical                — 361
                                             g.l.b. 14
                                                                                     factor— 42                              —of degree k 58          1                index                                     —   fractional ideal 401

                      — 349ff
                                             Galois
                                                                                     finite— 92ff                            —system of equations                        —of a subgroup 38                       —matrix 331
  multilinear                                  —correspondence 246                   finitely   generated      — 32,            346                                            — 245
                                                                                                                                                                         relative                              irreducible
  primary rational canoni-                     —extension 245                          76ff                                homorphism                                  induced homomorphism                      —element 136
        cal— 361
                                    — 360
                                               —fields 278ff
                                                                                     free— 65ff                              induced— 199, 209                              199 209                              —module 416
  rational canonical                           Fundamental Theorem
                                                                                     free abelian—7        Iff               A>homomorphism 243                        induction                                 —polynomial           161, 234
formal
  —derivative 161
                                                 of— Theory 245ff, 263
                                                                                     freeproduct of— 68                      kernel of    a— 31, 119,                    mathematical          — 10              —        413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     variety,
                                               —groups 243                           Galois— 243                                170                                      transfinite      — 14                 irredundant          primary   de-
  — power        154ff
                     series                    —group of a polynomial                Galois — of a polynomial                matrix of      a— 329ff, 333              infinite set 16                              composition 381
four group 29                                     269ff
                                                                                       269ff                                 natural — 469                             initial object 57                       isolated prime ideal 384
fractional ideal 401                           —Theory 230ff
                                                                                     homomorphism of                         — of algebras 228                         injections                              isomorphism 30, 118, 170
free                                         Gauss Lemma 162                           30ff, 43ff                            —of groups 30ff, 43ff                       canonical— 60, 130, 173                 — theorems 44, 125ff,
  — abelian group 7                 Iff      Gaussian Integers 139                   identity element of a                   —of modules 170ff,199ff                   injective                                     172ff
  —group 65ff                                general                                   24                                    —of rings      1 1                          —function 4                             natural    — 468
  —module 181ff, 188                           —equation of degree n                 indecomposable       — 83               substitution    — 153                       —module 193ff                         isotropy group 89
  —object functor 479                            308ff                               inverses in  —
                                                                                                 24                        Hopkin's Theorem 443                        inner   automorphism              91,
  —object a category in                        — polynomial of degree n              isomorphic   — 30                                                                      459                                join of groups 33
        55ff                                      308                                isotropy— 89                          ideal(s) 122ff                              inseparable                             Jordan
  —product 68                                generalized                             join of— 33                             algebra — 228                               —degree 285ff                           —canonical form 361
  rank or dimension of a                       —associative law 28                   metacyclic — 99                         finitelygenerated — 123                     purely    —extension 282ff                       —matrix 359
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 elementary
        module 185                             —commutative law 28                   nilpotent— 100                          fractional — 401
                                                                                                                             —generated by a 123
                                                                                                                                                                       integers 9ff
                                                                                                                                                                                      — 139
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —   Holder Theorem 111,
freshman's dream 121                           —fundamental theorem                  —of integers modulo m,                                               set            Gaussian                                  375
Frobenius Theorem 461                             of Galois Theory 263                 27                                    invertible — 401                            —modulo m 27, 116                     Jacobson
                                     6                                 —— —                                  ——                                  —                                 8                                   —   ,




498                                                      INDEX                                                                                                     INDEX                                                       499


   — Density Theorem 420                 linear transformation 170               similar— 332, 355ff                       simple    — 416           nonsingular matrix 331                P-primary 380, 384
   —radical 426ff                          characteristic polynomi-              skew- symmetric   335 —                   sum of    — 171            norm 289                             P-radical 425
   — semisimple 429                              al of   a— 366ff                symmetric  — 335                          tensor product of          normal                               pair
                                           decomposition of a                    trace of    — 369                             208fF                    —closure 265                         —formation 6
^-algebra, see algebra                           355ff                           triangular — 335                          torsion— 179, 220            —endomorphism 84                     ordered — 6
A^-homomorphism 243                        eigenvalues of a        — 367       maximal                                     torsion-free   — 220         —extension 264ff field             partial ordering 13
Kaplansky, I. vi, 251, 391,                eigenvectors of a       — 367         —element      13                          trivial— 170                 —series      375
                                                                                                                                                                   107ff,                  partition 7
        432                                elementary divisors of a              —ideal 127ff                              unitary   — 169              —subgroup 4       Iff              perfect field 289
kernel, 31, 119, 170                             — 357                           — normal subgroup 108               Moebius function 301            normalization lemma 410               permutation(s) 26, 46ff
           — 482
   difference                              invariant factors of a                —subfield 457                       monic                           normalizer 89                           disjoint — 47
   —of a morphism 483                            357                           maximum condition 373                       —
                                                                                                                         morphism 480                null set 3                              even   — 48
Klein four group 29                        matrix of       a— 329, 333         McBrien, V.O.         xiii,   121           — polynomial 150          nullity 335                             odd— 48
Kronecker                                             — 335
                                           nullity of a                        McCoy radical 444ff                   Monk, G.S. ix, 222              Nullstellensatz 412                     orbits of     — 47
  —delta 204                               rank of a — 335ff                   McKay, J.H. 93                        monoid 24                       number                                  sign of a— 48
   — method 167
        's                               linearly       disjoint   subfields   meaningful product 27                 monomial 152                       cardinal  —     16ff               Polynomial(s)
Krull                                            318ff                         membership 2                                degree of a   — 157          natural   —9                         characteristic — 366ff
   — Intersection Theorem,               linearly independent                  metacyclic group 99                   monomorphism 30, 118,           Nunke, R. J. x, xiii, 93                coefficientsof— 150
     389                                   —automorphisms, 291                 middle linear map 207, 217                      170                                                           content of a — 162
   — Schmidt Theorem, 86                   —elements         74, 181             canonical    — 209                        —   in a category 480     object                                  cyclotomic — 166, 298
                                         local ring 147                        minimal                               morphism 52, 480ff                 —   in a category 52                 degree of— 157, 158
l.u.b.,      14                          localization 147                        —annihilator 226                          cokernel of a   — 483        initial— 57                          discriminant of         — 270
Lagrange's                               logic    1                              —element 373                              epic— 480                    terminal   — 57                      Galois group of a
   — Interpolation Formula               lower bound 14                          —left ideal 416                           kernel of a  — 483        odd permutation 48                           269ff
     166                                 Lying-over Theorem 398                  —normal subgroup 103                      monic     — 480           one-to-one                              general      —of degree n 308
   —Theorem 39                                                                   — polynomial 234, 356                     zero— 482                    —correspondence                5     —    in n indeterminates
lattice14                                m-system 449                            — prime       382
                                                                                             ideal                   multilinear                        — function 4                              151
   complete — 15                         Mac Lane, S. xiii, 325, 464           minimum                                     —form 349ff               onto function 5                         irreducible— 161, 234
Law of Well Ordering 10                  main diagonal 328                       —condition 373                            — function 349ff          operation                               minimal — 234, 356
leading coefficient 1 50                 map, see function                       —element 13                         multiple root 161, 261             binary— 24                           minimum — 234
least                                    Maschke's Theorem 454                   — polynomial 234                    multiplicative set 142            elementary row or                     monic — 150
   —element       13                     mathematical induction 10             minor of a matrix 352                 multiplicity of a root 161          column — 338                        primitive — 162
   — upper bound        14               matrices, 328ff                       modular left ideal 417                mutatis mutandis xv             opposite                                ring of—        151, 156
                                                                                                                                                                                                            149ff,
left                                       characteristic polynomi-            module(s) 168ff, 371                  n-th root of unity, see unity     —category 466                         roots of— 160
   —adjoint 477fT                                als   of— 366fT                 algebra   — 451                     «-fold transitive 424             —ring, 122, 330                       separable — 261
  —  annihilator 444                       companion  — 358                      Artinian— 372ff                     Nakayama's Lemma 389            orbit 89                              power
  —coset 38                                determinants of— 35          Iff      completely reducible                natural                           —of a permutation 47                  —axiom        3
  —exact 201                               direct sum of— 360                      437                                 —homomorphism 469             order                                   —    series   1 54fF

  —Goldie ring 447ff                       eigenvalues of— 368                   direct sum of      — 173, 175         —isomorphism 468                —ideal 220                            —    set 3
  —ideal 122                               eigenvectors of— 368                  direct product of    — 173            — numbers 9                     left— 447                           predecessor
  — inverse of a function            5     elementary — 338                      dual— 203ff                           —transformation 468fT           — of an element 35, 220               immediate — 14
  — invertible element       1   1         elementary divisors of                exact sequence of       — 175ff     nil                               — of a group 24                     presentation of a group 67
  — order 447                                — 361                               faithful— 418                         —ideal 430                      partial   — 13                      primary
  —quasi-regular 426                       elementary Jordan — 359               free— 181ff, 188                      —radical 379, 450             ordered pair 6                          —decomposition, 381
  —quotient ring 447                       equivalent — 332, 335ff               homomorphism of                     nilpotent                       ordering                                 383fT
length of a series 107, 375                — row echelon form
                                             in                                     170ff, 199ff                       —element 121, 430               — by extension          1             —ideal 380ff
Levitsky's Theorem 434                       346                                 injective   — 193ff                   — endomorphism 85                    — 13
                                                                                                                                                       linear                                P-primary ideal 380
linear                                     invariant factors of                  isomorphism          theorems         —group KX)fT                    partial— 13                           P-primary submodule
  —algebra 327ff                             361                                   for— 172ff                          — ideal 430                     simple — 13                                384
  —combination         71                           — 331
                                           invertible                            Noetherian    —     372ff           Noether                           total— 13                             —rational canonical
  — dependence         181                 minors of— 352                        — over a principal          ideal     — Normalization               orthogonal idempotents                    form 361
  —equations 346                           —of a homomorphism                      domain 218ff                          Lemma 410                       135, 439                            —submodule 383ff
  — functional 203                           329ff, 333                          projective — 190ff                            Skolem Theorem 460                                          prime
  — independence         74, 181,          rank of— 336, 337                     rank of— 185                        Noetherian                      P.I.D., see principal ideal             associated —     380,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ideal
   291                                     row spaces of   336 —                 reflexive— 205                        —modules 372ff, 387ff             domain                                387
  —ordering 13                             secondary   340 —                     semisimple — 437                      —rings 372, 387ff             /;-group 93                             —element 136
                                                                             —                                            —5                                      —                                                                                   — ,,




500                                                    INDEX                                                                                                                            INDEX                                                         501


  embedded      —ideal 384             purely transcendental ex-                 regular                                                 integrally closed  — 397         —extension 261,                   282ff,   span 181
  —ideal 126ff, 377ff                         tension 314                          —element 447                                          left quotient   — 447              324                                      spectrum 378
  —integer      11
                                       quasi-inverse, 426
                                                                                   —function 412                                        local— 147                        —polynomial 261                            split exact sequence       177
  isolated —     384
                ideal                                                              —left     417ideal                                   Noetherian— 372, 387ff         separably generated exten-                    splitting fields 257ff
                                       quasi-regular 426
  minimal —       382
                 ideal                                                             — quasi 426
                                                                                         left                ,                          — of formal power series            sion 322                                 stabilizer 89
  —radical 379, 444ff                   quaternion group 33, 97, 99                Von Neumann —ring                                      154ff                        separating transcendence                      stable intermediate field
                                       quaternions
  relatively—integers           11
                                                                   of real
                                                                                         442                                            —of polynomials 149ff               base 322                                      250
  relatively—elements 140                 division
                                              117,461
                                                        ring
                                                                                 relative complement 3                                  —of quotients or       frac-   sequence 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     standard
  —ring 445ff                          quotient
                                                                                 relation 6, 66                                               tions 144ff                exact— 175ff                                  —basis of R n 336
  subfield 279
                                          — 6                                       antisymmetric        — 13                            opposite— 122, 330               short exact— 76          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —^-product 28
primitive
                                              class
                                          —field 144
                                                                                   congruence — 27                                       primitive   — 418ff           series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     subalgebra 228
  —element theorem 287,                   —group 42ff                              equivalence — 6                                       prime— 445ff                     ascending central — 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     subclass 2
      288                                                                          generators and —                      s,   67ff,     quotient— 125, 447               composition— 108, 375
                                          —ring 125, 144ff, 447
                                                                                                                                        radical — 429
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     subdirect product 434
  —ideal 425                                                                         343ff                                                                               equivalent— 109, 375
  —polynomial 162                      r-cycle 46                                  reflexive—6                                          regular — 442                    formal power —                  1 54ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     subdirectly irreducible ring

  —ring 418ff                          Z?-module, see module                       symmetric — 6                                        semiprime — 444ff                normal—          375107ff,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          442
  —root of unity 295                    Rad / 379                                  transitive—6                                         semisimple— 429, 434ff           refinement of a — 108,                      subfield(s)

principal                              radical                                   relative                                               simple — 4l6ff                      375                                        composite— 233
  —ideal 123                             —extension 303ff    field                 —dimension 245                                       subdirectly irreducible          solvable— 108                                 —generated by a 231     set

  —ideal ring 123                        Jacobson — 426ff                          —index 245                                                 442                        subnormal  — 107ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          232
  —ideal domain 123                      nil— 379, 450                           relativelyprime                                      root                             set(s)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       linearly      — 318ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   disjoint

  modules over a—ideal                   —of an       379
                                                       ideal                       —integers        11                                  adjoining a — 236                denumerable — 16                              maximal — 457
      domain 218ff                       P-radical 425                             —ring elements 140                                   multiple— 161, 261                       —
                                                                                                                                                                          disjoint           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       prime — 279
principle                                 prime— 379, 444ff                      Remainder Theorem 159                                  multiplicity of a — 161          empty—          3                           subgroup(s) 3 Iff
  —of mathematical                       —property 425                             Chinese — 131                                        —of unity 294                    equipollent — 15                              characteristic— 103
    induction 10                         —ring 429                               representable functor 470                              simple — 161, 261                     — 16
                                                                                                                                                                         finite                                        closed — 247
  — of             induc-
            transfinite                  solvable by — 303     s                 representation 470                                   row                                       — 16
                                                                                                                                                                         infinite                                      commutator — 102
    tion 14                            range of a function 3                     resolvant cubic 272                                    —echelon form 346                linearly ordered — 13                         cyclic— 32
  —of well ordering 14                 rank                                      restriction 4                                          elementary — operation           multiplicative — 142                          derived— 102
product                                  column — 336, 339                       right                                                        338                        null—      3                                  fully invariant — 103
  —category 467                          —of a abelian group
                                                   free                            —adjoint 477                                         —rank 336, 339                   partially ordered — 13                        —generated by a 32      set

  Cartesian —        6, 7ff                72                                      —annihilator 444                                     —space 336                       power —         3                             —generated by groups
  direct—      59ff,    130,    131,     —of a module 185
                                                      free                         —coset 38                                            —vector 329                      underlying — 55                                  33
      173                                —of a homomorphism                        —Goldie ring 447                                   ruler and compass con-             well ordered — 13                             join of— 33
  — a category
      in                 53ff                 335ff, 339                           —ideal 122                                                 structions 238           Short                                           maximal normal — 108
  —map 228                               row— 336, 339                             —inverse of a function                        5    Russell's Paradox 2                —Five Lemma 176                               minimal normal — 103
  semidirect — 99                        —of a matrix 337ff                        —           element 116
                                                                                         invertible                                                                      —exact sequence 176                           normal — 41      ff

  subdirect — 434                      rational                                    —quasi-regular 426                                 scalar matrix 328                sign of a permutation 48                        proper — 32
  weak        —
            direct     60, 62            —canonical form 360                       —quotient ring 447                                 Schreiefs Theorem 110, 375       similar matrices 332, 355ff                     Sylow— 94
projection                               —function 233                           ring(s) 115ff, 37 Iff, 414ff                         Schroeder-Bernstein              simple                                          transitive— 92, 269
  canonical— 8, 59, 130,                 symmetric — function                      Artinian— 372, 421, 435                                   Theorem 17                  —components 440                               trivial   — 32
      173                                   252ff                                  Boolean— 120                                       Schur's Lemma 419                  —extension     232      field               submodule(s) 171
projective module 190ff                rationals modulo one 27                     commutative           —       1   1   5,
                                                                                                                                      second isomorphism
                                                                                                                                                                         —group 49                                     chain      conditions     on
proper                                 Recursion Theorem 10                           371ff                                                                              —module 179, 375,416ff                          372ff
                                                                                                                                             theorem 44, 126, 173
  — 2 class                            reduced                                     direct product of                 — 130,                                              —ordering           13                        cyclic   — 171
                                                                                                                                      secondary matrix 340
  —ideal 123                             —abelian group 198                              131                                                                             —ring 416fT                                                   — 171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       finitely generated
  —refinement 108, 375                   —primary decomposi-                       discrete valuation                    — 401        semidirect product 99
                                                                                                                                                                         —root, 261     161,                           —generated (or spanned)
  —subgroup 32                            tion 381, 384                                   — 116, 462
                                                                                   division                                           semigroup 24
                                                                                                                                                                       singleton 6                                       by a     171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  set
  —values 367                            —row echelon form 346                     endomorphism  — 41                                 semiprime ring 444ff             skew-symmetric                                  primary — 383ff
  —vectors 367                           —word 68      64,                         Euclidean — 139                                    semisimple                         —matrix 335                                   sum of— 171
Priifer domain 409                     refinement of a series 108,                 —extensions 394ff                                    —module 437                      —multilinear form 349                         torsion — 220
pullback 170, 484                           375                                    Goldmann— 400                                        —ring 429, 434ff               solvable                                      subnormal series 107ff
purely inseparable                     reflexive                                   group — 117                                        separable                          —by radicals 303                            subring 122
  —element 282                           —module 205                               homomorphism of                                      —degree 285ff                    —group        108
                                                                                                                                                                                        102ff,                         —generated by a        set 231
  —extension 282ff                       —relation 6                                     118                                            —element 261                     —      108
                                                                                                                                                                           series                                        232, 395
                                                                                     3




502                                       INDEX

subset 3                     total                                —mapping property           9,

subspace 171                   —degree 157                         57
  </>-invariant   — 356        —ordering 13                       —object 57
substitution homomor-        trace 289, 369                     upper bound 13
      phism 153              transcendence                      valuation
successor                      —base 313ff                        —domain 409
  immediate    — 15            —degree 316                             —ring 404
                                                                  discrete
sum ( = coproduct) 54ff        separating —base 322
                                                                Van Dyck's Theorem 67
sum                          transcendental
  direct— 60, 62, 173, 175     —element 233                     variety 409

  — of submodules 171          —extension 233, 31        Iff
                                                                vector
                                                                            — 333
                               purely—extension 314
                                                                  column
summand
  direct— 63, 437            transfinite induction 14
                                                                  row— 329
                                                                vector space 169, 180ff
surjective function 5
Swords, R.J., xiii
                             transformation
                               linear— 170, 355ff
                                                                  finite dimensional     — 186
                                                                Von Neumann regular ring
Sylow                          natural— 468ff
                                                                    442
  — />-subgroup 94           transitive
  —theorems 92ff               —relation 6                      weak direct product 60, 62
symmetric                      —subgroup 92, 269                Wedderburn's Theorem on
  —group 26, 46ff              —subring 424                         finite division rings
  —matrix 335                translation 88                         462
  —multilinear function      transpose of a matrix 328          Wedderburn-Artin
   349                       transposition 46                       Theorems 421, 435
  —rational function 252ff   triangular matrix 335              well ordered set 1
  —relation 6                trichotomy law 18                  well ordering
  symmetries of the square   trivial ideal   123                  law of— 10
      26                                                          —principle 14
                             U.F.D., see unique factori-        word 64, 68
tensor product 208fT                 zation domain                reduced — 64, 68
  —of algebras 229           underlying set 55                    empty — 64
  induced homomorphism
                             union 3
    on the— 209
terminal object 57
                               disjoint   — 58                  Yoneda, N. 472

                             unique      factorization    do-
third isomorphism theorem                                       Zassenhaus Lemma, 109,
                                     main 137                       375
      44, 126, 173
                             unit 116                           zero 409
torsion
  —group 78                    —map 228                           —divisor 116
  —module 179, 220           unitary module 169                   —element 115
  —subgroup 78               unity                                —matrix 328
  —submodule 179, 220          root of— 294                       —morphism 482
torsion-free                   primitive root of     — 295        —object 481
  —group 78                  universal                            —of a polynomial 60     1




  —module 220                  —element 470                     Zorn's Lemma, 13 ,$L
